8736554	The structure of elongation factor G in complex with GDP: conformational flexibility and nucleotide exchange.	BACKGROUND: Elongation factor G (EF-G) catalyzes the translocation step of translation. During translocation EF-G passes through four main conformational states: the GDP complex, the nucleotide-free state, the GTP complex, and the GTPase conformation. The first two of these conformations have been previously investigated by crystallographic methods. RESULTS: The structure of EF-G-GDP has been refined at 2.4 A resolution. Comparison with the nucleotide-free structure reveals that, upon GDP release, the phosphate-binding loop (P-loop) adopts a closed conformation. This affects the position of helix CG, the switch II loop and domains II, IV and V. Asp83 has a conformation similar to the conformation of the corresponding residue in the EF-Tu/EF-Ts complex. The magnesium ion is absent in EF-G-GDP. CONCLUSIONS: The results illustrate that conformational changes in the P-loop can be transmitted to other parts of the structure. A comparison of the structures of EF-G and EF-Tu suggests that EF-G, like EF-Tu, undergoes a transition with domain rearrangements. The conformation of EF-G-GDP around the nucleotide-binding site may be related to the mechanism of nucleotide exchange.
7520279	Crystal structures of wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase complexed with 4-aminobenzoate,2,4-dihydroxybenzoate, and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate and of the Tyr222Ala mutant complexed with 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate. Evidence for a proton channel and a new binding mode of the flavin ring.	The crystal structures of wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens, complexed with the substrate analogues 4-aminobenzoate, 2,4-dihydroxybenzoate, and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate have been determined at 2.3-, 2.5-, and 2.8-A resolution, respectively. In addition, the crystal structure of a Tyr222Ala mutant, complexed with 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate, has been determined at 2.7-A resolution. The structures have been refined to R factors between 14.5% and 15.8% for data between 8.0 A and the high-resolution limit. The differences between these complexes and the wild-type enzyme-substrate complex are all concentrated in the active site region. Binding of substrate analogues bearing a 4-amino group (4-aminobenzoate and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate) leads to binding of a water molecule next to the active site Tyr385. As a result, a continuous hydrogen-bonding network is present between the 4-amino group of the substrate analogue and the side chain of His72. It is likely that this hydrogen-bonding network is transiently present during normal catalysis, where it may or may not function as a proton channel assisting the deprotonation of the 4-hydroxyl group of the normal substrate upon binding to the active site. Binding of substrate analogues bearing a hydroxyl group at the 2-position (2,4-dihydroxybenzoate and 2-hydroxy-4-aminobenzoate) leads to displacement of the flavin ring from the active site. The flavin is no longer in the active site (the "in" conformation) but is in the cleft leading to the active site instead (the "out" conformation). It is proposed that movement of the FAD out of the active site may provide an entrance for the substrate to enter the active site and an exit for the product to leave.
15663946	Structural and energetic consequences of mutations in a solvated hydrophobic cavity.	The structural and energetic consequences of modifications to the hydrophobic cavity of interleukin 1-beta (IL-1beta) are described. Previous reports demonstrated that the entirely hydrophobic cavity of IL-1beta contains positionally disordered water. To gain a better understanding of the nature of this cavity and the water therein, a number of mutant proteins were constructed by site-directed mutagenesis, designed to result in altered hydrophobicity of the cavity. These mutations involve the replacement of specific phenylalanine residues, which circumscribe the cavity, with tyrosine, tryptophan, leucine and isoleucine. Using differential scanning calorimetry to determine the relative stabilities of the wild-type and mutant proteins, we found all of the mutants to be destabilizing. X-ray crystallography was used to identify the structural consequences of the mutations. No clear correlation between the hydrophobicities of the specific side-chains introduced and the resulting stabilities was found.
10336378	Structural basis for the activity of two muconate cycloisomerase variants toward substituted muconates.	We have refined to 2.3 A resolution two muconate cycloisomerase (MCIase) variant structures, F329I and I54V, that differ from each other and from wild-type in their activity toward cis,cis-muconate (CCM) and substituted CCMs. The working and free R-factors for F329I are 17.4/21.6% and for I54V, 17.6/22.3% with good stereochemistry. Except for the mutated residue, there are no significant changes in structure. To understand the differences in enzymatic properties we docked substituted CCMs and CCM into the active sites of the variants and wild type. The extra space the mutations create appears to account for most of the enzymatic differences. The lack of other structural changes explains why, although structurally equivalent changes occur in chloromuconate cycloisomerase (CMCIase), the changes in themselves do not convert a MCIase into a dehalogenating CMCIase. Reanalysis of the CMCIase structure revealed only one general acid/base, K169. The structural implication is that, in 2-chloro-CCM conversion by CMCIase, the lactone ring of 5-chloromuconolactone rotates before dehalogenation to bring the acidic C4 proton next to K169. Therefore, K169 alone performs both required protonation and deprotonation steps, the first at C5 as in MCIase, and the second, after ring rotation, at C4. This distinguishes CMCIase from alpha/beta barrel isomerases and racemases, which use two different bases.
2143562	Three-dimensional structure of the ATPase fragment of a 70K heat-shock cognate protein.	The three-dimensional structure of the amino-terminal 44K ATPase fragment of the 70K bovine heat-shock cognate protein has been solved to a resolution of 2.2 A. The ATPase fragment has two structural lobes with a deep cleft between them; ATP binds at the base of the cleft. Surprisingly, the nucleotide-binding 'core' of the ATPase fragment has a tertiary structure similar to that of hexokinase, although the remainder of the structures of the two proteins are completely dissimilar, suggesting that both the phosphotransferase mechanism and the substrate-induced conformational change intrinsic to the hexokinases may be used by the 70K heat shock-related proteins.
14761185	Explorations of peptide and oligonucleotide binding sites of tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase using vanadate complexes.	Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) catalyzes the hydrolysis of a phosphodiester bond between a tyrosine residue and a DNA 3' phosphate and functions as a DNA repair enzyme that cleaves stalled topoisomerase I-DNA complexes. We previously determined a procedure to crystallize a quaternary complex containing Tdp1, vanadate, a DNA oligonucleotide, and a tyrosine-containing peptide that mimics the transition state for hydrolysis of the Tdp1 substrate. Here, the ability of vanadate to accept a variety of different ligands is exploited to produce several different quaternary complexes with a variety of oligonucleotides, and peptides or a tyrosine analogue, in efforts to explore the binding properties of the Tdp1 DNA and peptide binding clefts. Eight crystal structures of Tdp1 with vanadate, oligonucleotides, and peptides or peptide analogues were determined. These structures demonstrated that Tdp1 is able to bind substituents with limited sequence variation in the polypeptide moiety and also bind oligonucleotides with sequence variation at the 3' end. Additionally, the tyrosine analogue octopamine can replace topoisomerase I derived peptides as the apical ligand to vanadate. The versatility of this system suggests that the formation of quaternary complexes around vanadate could be adapted to become a useful method for structure-based inhibitor design and has the potential to be generally applicable to other enzymes that perform chemistry on phosphate esters.
9730812	Crystal structure of the zinc-dependent beta-lactamase from Bacillus cereus at 1.9 A resolution: binuclear active site with features of a mononuclear enzyme.	The structure of the zinc-dependent beta-lactamase II from Bacillus cereus has been determined at 1.9 A resolution in a crystal form with two molecules in the asymmetric unit and 400 waters (space group P3121; Rcryst = 20.8%). The active site contains two zinc ions: Zn1 is tightly coordinated by His86, His88, and His149, while Zn2 is loosely coordinated by Asp90, Cys168, and His210. A water molecule (W1) lies between the two zinc ions but is significantly closer to Zn1 and at a distance of only 1.9 A is effectively a hydroxide moiety and a potential, preactivated nucleophile. In fact, Asp90 bridges W1 to Zn2, and its location is thus distinct from that of the bridging water molecules in the binuclear zinc peptidases or other binuclear zinc hydrolases. Modeling of penicillin, cephalosporin, and carbapenem binding shows that all are readily accommodated within the shallow active site cleft of the enzyme, and the Zn1-bound hydroxide is ideally located for nucleophilic attack at the beta-lactam carbonyl. This enzyme also functions with only one zinc ion present. The Zn1-Zn2 distances differ in the two independent molecules in the crystal (3.9 and 4.4 A), yet the Zn1-W1 distances are both 1.9 A, arguing against involvement of Zn2 in W1 activation. The role of Zn2 is unclear, but the B. cereus enzyme may be an evolutionary intermediate between the mono- and bizinc metallo-beta-lactamases. The broad specificity of this enzyme, together with the increasing prevalence of zinc-dependent metallo-beta-lactamases, poses a real clinical threat, and this structure provides a basis for understanding its mechanism and designing inhibitors.
11976494	The structure of L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase (class II) solved by low-resolution SIR phasing and 20-fold NCS averaging.	The enzyme L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase catalyzes the reversible cleavage of L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate to dihydroxyacetone phosphate and L-lactaldehyde. It is a homotetramer with an M(r) of 30 000 per subunit and crystallized in space group P3(2)21. The enzyme shows a low sequence identity of 18% with the structurally known L-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase that splits a stereoisomer in a similar reaction. Structure analysis was initiated with a single heavy-atom derivative measured to 6 A resolution. The resulting poor electron density, a self-rotation function and the working hypothesis that both enzymes are C(4) symmetric with envelopes that resemble one another allowed the location of the 20 protomers of the asymmetric unit. The crystal-packing unit was a D(4)-symmetric propeller consisting of five D(4)-symmetric octamers around an internal crystallographic twofold axis. Presumably, the propellers associate laterally in layers, which in turn pile up along the 3(2) axis to form the crystal. The non-crystallographic symmetry was used to extend the phases to the 2.7 A resolution limit and to establish a refined atomic model of the enzyme. The structure showed that the two enzymes are indeed homologous and that they possess chemically similar active centres.
12176391	Gamma-adaptin appendage domain: structure and binding site for Eps15 and gamma-synergin.	The AP1 complex is one of a family of heterotetrameric clathrin-adaptor complexes involved in vesicular trafficking between the Golgi and endosomes. The complex has two large subunits, gamma and beta1, which can be divided into trunk, hinge, and appendage domains. The 1.8 A resolution structure of the gamma appendage is presented. The binding site for the known gamma appendage ligand gamma-synergin is mapped through creation of point mutations designed on the basis of the structure. We also show that Eps15, a protein believed to be involved in vesicle formation at the plasma membrane, is also a ligand of gamma appendage and binds to the same site as gamma-synergin. This observation explains the demonstrated brefeldinA (BFA)-sensitive colocalization of Eps15 and AP1 at the Golgi complex.
10469827	Experimental verification of the 'stability profile of mutant protein' (SPMP) data using mutant human lysozymes.	The stability profile of mutant protein (SPMP) (Ota,M., Kanaya,S. and Nishikawa,K., 1995, J. Mol. Biol., 248, 733-738) estimates the changes in conformational stability due to single amino acid substitutions using a pseudo-energy potential developed for evaluating structure-sequence compatibility in the structure prediction method, the 3D-1D compatibility evaluation. Nine mutant human lysozymes expected to significantly increase in stability from SPMP were constructed, in order to experimentally verify the reliability of SPMP. The thermodynamic parameters for denaturation and crystal structures of these mutant proteins were determined. One mutant protein was stabilized as expected, compared with the wild-type protein. However, the others were not stabilized even though the structural changes were subtle, indicating that SPMP overestimates the increase in stability or underestimates negative effects due to substitution. The stability changes in the other mutant human lysozymes previously reported were also analyzed by SPMP. The correlation of the stability changes between the experiment and prediction depended on the types of substitution: there were some correlations for proline mutants and cavity-creating mutants, but no correlation for mutants related to side-chain hydrogen bonds. The present results may indicate some additional factors that should be considered in the calculation of SPMP, suggesting that SPMP can be refined further.
11054294	Structure of a mutant EF-G reveals domain III and possibly the fusidic acid binding site.	The crystal structure of Thermus thermophilus elongation factor G (EF-G) carrying the point mutation His573Ala was determined at a resolution of 2.8 A. The mutant has a more closed structure than that previously reported for wild-type EF-G. This is obtained by a 10 degrees rigid rotation of domains III, IV and V with regard to domains I and II. This rotation results in a displacement of the tip of domain IV by approximately 9 A. The structure of domain III is now fully visible and reveals the double split beta-alpha-beta motif also observed for EF-G domain V and for several ribosomal proteins. A large number of fusidic acid resistant mutations found in domain III have now been possible to locate. Possible locations for the effector loop and a possible binding site for fusidic acid are discussed in relation to some of the fusidic acid resistant mutations.
10903932	Structural basis for chitin recognition by defense proteins: GlcNAc residues are bound in a multivalent fashion by extended binding sites in hevein domains.	BACKGROUND: Many plants respond to pathogenic attack by producing defense proteins that are capable of reversible binding to chitin, a polysaccharide present in the cell wall of fungi and the exoskeleton of insects. Most of these chitin-binding proteins include a common structural motif of 30 to 43 residues organized around a conserved four-disulfide core, known as the 'hevein domain' or 'chitin-binding' motif. Although a number of structural and thermodynamic studies on hevein-type domains have been reported, these studies do not clarify how chitin recognition is achieved. RESULTS: The specific interaction of hevein with several (GlcNAc)(n) oligomers has been studied using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), analytical ultracentrifugation and isothermal titration microcalorimetry (ITC). The data demonstrate that hevein binds (GlcNAc)(2-4) in 1:1 stoichiometry with millimolar affinity. In contrast, for (GlcNAc)(5), a significant increase in binding affinity is observed. Analytical ultracentrifugation studies on the hevein-(GlcNAc)(5,8) interaction allowed detection of protein-carbohydrate complexes with a ratio of 2:1 in solution. NMR structural studies on the hevein-(GlcNAc)(5) complex showed the existence of an extended binding site with at least five GlcNAc units directly involved in protein-sugar contacts. CONCLUSIONS: The first detailed structural model for the hevein-chitin complex is presented on the basis of the analysis of NMR data. The resulting model, in combination with ITC and analytical ultracentrifugation data, conclusively shows that recognition of chitin by hevein domains is a dynamic process, which is not exclusively restricted to the binding of the nonreducing end of the polymer as previously thought. This allows chitin to bind with high affinity to a variable number of protein molecules, depending on the polysaccharide chain length. The biological process is multivalent.
11018727	Dynamics of a mobile loop at the active site of Escherichia coli asparaginase.	Asparaginase II from Escherichia coli is well-known member of the bacterial class II amidohydrolases. Enzymes of this family utilize a peculiar catalytic mechanism in which a pair of threonine residues play pivotal roles. Another common feature is a mobile surface loop that closes over the active site when the substrates is bound. We have studied the motion of the loop by stopped-flow experiments using the fluorescence of tryptophan residues as the spectroscopic probe. With wild-type enzyme the fluorescence of the only tryptophan, W66, was monitored. Here asparagine induced a rapid closure of the loop. The rate constants of the process (100-150 s(-1) at 4 degrees C) were considerably higher than those of the rate-limiting catalytic step. A more selective spectroscopic probe was generated by replacing W66 with tyrosine and Y25, a component of the loop, with tryptophan. In the resulting enzyme variant, k(cat) and the rate of loop movement were reduced by factors of 10(2) and >10(3), respectively, while substrate binding was unaffected. This indicates that the presence of tyrosine in position 25 is essential for both loop closure and catalysis. Numerical simulations of the observed transients are consistent with a model where loop closure is an absolute prerequisite for substrate turnover.
2005130	Molecular structure of the toxin domain of heat-stable enterotoxin produced by a pathogenic strain of Escherichia coli. A putative binding site for a binding protein on rat intestinal epithelial cell membranes.	Heat-stable enterotoxins are a family of toxin peptides that are produced by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli and consist of 18 and 19 amino acid residues (Aimoto, S., Takao, T., Shimonishi, Y., Hara, S., Takeda, T., Takeda, Y., and Miwatani, T. (1982) Eur. J. Biochem. 129, 257-263). A synthetic fully toxic analog of the enterotoxin, Mpr5-STp(5-17), where Mpr is beta-mercaptopropionic acid and which consists of 13 amino acid residues from Cys5 to Cys17 in a heat-stable enterotoxin but is deaminated at its N terminus (Kubota, H., Hidaka, Y., Ozaki, H., Ito, H., Hirayama, T., Takeda, Y., and Shimonishi, Y. (1989) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 161, 229-235), has been crystalized from water, and its crystal structure has been solved by a direct method and refined by least square procedures to give an R factor of 0.089. The crystal belongs to the orthorhombic space group P2(1)2(1)2(1) with unit cell constants a = 21.010 (2) A, b = 27.621 (4) A, and c = 12.781 (1) A. The asymmetric unit of the crystals contains one peptide molecule with 13 water molecules. A right-hand spiral peptide backbone extends throughout the molecule. Three beta-turns are located along this spiral and fixed tightly by three intramolecular disulfide linkages. The actual structure predicts the biniding region on the enterotoxin to the receptor protein on the membrane of rat intestinal epithelial cells.
7922028	The high-resolution three-dimensional solution structures of the oxidized and reduced states of human thioredoxin.	BACKGROUND: Thioredoxin is a ubiquitous protein and is involved in a variety of fundamental biological functions. Its active site is conserved and has two redox active cysteines in the sequence Trp-Cys-Gly-Pro-Cys. No structures of the oxidized and reduced states from the same species have been determined at high resolution under the same conditions and using the same methods. Hence, any detailed comparison of the two oxidation states has been previously precluded. RESULTS: The reduced and oxidized states of the (C62A, C69A, C73A) mutant of human thioredoxin have been investigated by multidimensional heteronuclear NMR. Structures for both states were determined on the basis of approximately 28 experimental restraints per residue, and the resulting precision of the two structures is very high. Consequently, subtle differences between the oxidized and reduced states can be reliably assessed and evaluated. Small differences, particularly within and around the active site can be discerned. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the structures of the reduced and oxidized states of the (C62A, C69A, C73A) mutant of human thioredoxin are very similar (with a backbone atomic root mean square difference of about 0.9 A) and the packing of side chains within the protein core is nearly identical. The conformational change between oxidized and reduced human thioredoxin is very small and localized to areas in spatial proximity to the redox active cysteines. These subtle structural differences, in addition to the restriction of conformational freedom within the active site upon oxidation, may be important for the different activities of thioredoxin involving a variety of target proteins.
8652549	Modulation of a salt link does not affect binding of phosphate to its specific active transport receptor.	Electrostatic interactions are among the key forces determining the structure and function of proteins. These are exemplified in the liganded form of the receptor, a phosphate binding protein from Escherichia coli. The phosphate, completely dehydrated and buried in the receptor, is bound by 12 hydrogen bonds as well as a salt link with Arg 135. We have modulated the ionic attraction while preserving the hydrogen bonds by mutating Asp 137, also salt linked to Arg 135, to Asn, Gly or Thr. High-resolution crystallographic analysis revealed that Gly and Thr (but not Asn) mutant proteins have incorporated a more electronegative Cl- in place of the Asp carboxylate. That no dramatic effect on phosphate affinity was produced by these ionic perturbations indicates a major role for hydrogen bonds and other local dipoles in the binding and charge stabilization of ionic ligands.
11456890	The first solution structure of a paramagnetic copper(II) protein: the case of oxidized plastocyanin from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC6803.	The NMR solution structure of oxidized plastocyanin from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC6803 is here reported. The protein contains paramagnetic copper(II), whose electronic relaxation times are quite unfavorable for NMR solution studies. The structure has been solved on the basis of 1041 meaningful NOESY cross-peaks, 18 1D NOEs, 26 T(1) values, 96 dihedral angle constraints, and 18 H-bonds. The detection of broad hyperfine-shifted signals and their full assignment allowed the identification of the copper(II) ligands and the determination of the Cu-S-C-H dihedral angle for the coordinated cysteine. The global root-mean-square deviation from the mean structure for the solution structure family is 0.72 +/- 0.14 and 1.16 +/- 0.17 A for backbone and heavy atoms, respectively. The structure is overall quite satisfactory and represents a breakthrough, in that it includes paramagnetic copper proteins among the metalloproteins for which solution structures can be afforded. The comparison with the available X-ray structure of a triple mutant is also performed.
16275926	Structure and activity of the axon guidance protein MICAL.	During development, neurons are guided to their targets by short- and long-range attractive and repulsive cues. MICAL, a large multidomain protein, is required for the combined action of semaphorins and plexins in axon guidance. Here, we present the structure of the N-terminal region of MICAL (MICAL(fd)) determined by x-ray diffraction to 2.0 A resolution. The structure shows that MICAL(fd) is an FAD-containing module structurally similar to aromatic hydroxylases and amine oxidases. In addition, we present biochemical data that show that MICAL(fd) is a flavoenzyme that in the presence of NADPH reduces molecular oxygen to H(2)O(2) (K(m,NAPDH) = 222 microM; k(cat) = 77 sec(-1)), a molecule with known signaling properties. We propose that the H(2)O(2) produced by this reaction may be one of the signaling molecules involved in axon guidance by MICAL.
8646536	An engineered allosteric switch in leucine-zipper oligomerization.	Controversy remains about the role of core side-chain packing in specifying protein structure. To investigate the influence of core packing on the oligomeric structure of a coiled coil, we engineered a GCN4 leucine zipper mutant that switches from two to three strands upon binding the hydrophobic ligands cyclohexane and benzene. In solution these ligands increased the apparent thermal stability and the oligomerization order of the mutant leucine zipper. The crystal structure of the peptide-benzene complex shows a single benzene molecule bound at the engineered site in the core of the trimer. These results indicate that coiled coils are well-suited to function as molecular switches and emphasize that core packing is an important determinant of oligomerization specificity.
11563970	Crystal structure of the wild-type and D30A mutant thioredoxin h of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and implications for the catalytic mechanism.	Thioredoxins are ubiquitous proteins which catalyse the reduction of disulphide bridges on target proteins. The catalytic mechanism proceeds via a mixed disulphide intermediate whose breakdown should be enhanced by the involvement of a conserved buried residue, Asp-30, as a base catalyst towards residue Cys-39. We report here the crystal structure of wild-type and D30A mutant thioredoxin h from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which constitutes the first crystal structure of a cytosolic thioredoxin isolated from a eukaryotic plant organism. The role of residue Asp-30 in catalysis has been revisited since the distance between the carboxylate OD1 of Asp-30 and the sulphur SG of Cys-39 is too great to support the hypothesis of direct proton transfer. A careful analysis of all available crystal structures reveals that the relative positioning of residues Asp-30 and Cys-39 as well as hydrophobic contacts in the vicinity of residue Asp-30 do not allow a conformational change sufficient to bring the two residues close enough for a direct proton transfer. This suggests that protonation/deprotonation of Cys-39 should be mediated by a water molecule. Molecular-dynamics simulations, carried out either in vacuo or in water, as well as proton-inventory experiments, support this hypothesis. The results are discussed with respect to biochemical and structural data.
3035380	Myristylation of picornavirus capsid protein VP4 and its structural significance.	We have obtained evidence that poliovirus and other picornavirus particles are specifically modified by having myristic acid covalently bound to a capsid protein. The electron density map of poliovirus confirms the position of the myristate molecule and defines its location in the virus particle. Analogies with other myristylated proteins suggest that the myristate moiety in picornaviruses may be involved in capsid assembly or in the entry of virus into cells.
8471602	Structure of the cobalt-dependent methionine aminopeptidase from Escherichia coli: a new type of proteolytic enzyme.	The X-ray structure of Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase (MAP) has been determined to 2.4-A resolution and refined to a crystallographic R-factor of 18.2%. The fold is novel and displays internal pseudo-2-fold symmetry which structurally relates the first and second halves of the polypeptide chain. The topology consists of a central antiparallel beta-sheet covered on one side by two pairs of alpha-helices and by a C-terminal loop. The other face of the beta-sheet, together with some irregular loops, forms the active site, which contains two cobalt ions 2.9 A apart. These metal ions are liganded by the side chains of Asp 97, Asp 108, Glu 204, Glu 235, and His 171 with approximate octahedral coordination. In terms of both the novel backbone fold and the constitution of the active site, MAP appears to represent a new class of proteolytic enzyme.
14990731	Crystal structures of a multidrug-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease reveal an expanded active-site cavity.	The goal of this study was to use X-ray crystallography to investigate the structural basis of resistance to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) protease inhibitors. We overexpressed, purified, and crystallized a multidrug-resistant (MDR) HIV-1 protease enzyme derived from a patient failing on several protease inhibitor-containing regimens. This HIV-1 variant contained codon mutations at positions 10, 36, 46, 54, 63, 71, 82, 84, and 90 that confer drug resistance to protease inhibitors. The 1.8-angstrom (A) crystal structure of this MDR patient isolate reveals an expanded active-site cavity. The active-site expansion includes position 82 and 84 mutations due to the alterations in the amino acid side chains from longer to shorter (e.g., V82A and I84V). The MDR isolate 769 protease "flaps" stay open wider, and the difference in the flap tip distances in the MDR 769 variant is 12 A. The MDR 769 protease crystal complexes with lopinavir and DMP450 reveal completely different binding modes. The network of interactions between the ligands and the MDR 769 protease is completely different from that seen with the wild-type protease-ligand complexes. The water molecule-forming hydrogen bonds bridging between the two flaps and either the substrate or the peptide-based inhibitor are lacking in the MDR 769 clinical isolate. The S1, S1', S3, and S3' pockets show expansion and conformational change. Surface plasmon resonance measurements with the MDR 769 protease indicate higher k(off) rates, resulting in a change of binding affinity. Surface plasmon resonance measurements provide k(on) and k(off) data (K(d) = k(off)/k(on)) to measure binding of the multidrug-resistant protease to various ligands. This MDR 769 protease represents a new antiviral target, presenting the possibility of designing novel inhibitors with activity against the open and expanded protease forms.
8401227	Use of proline mutants to help solve the NMR solution structure of type III antifreeze protein.	To help understand the structure/function relationships in antifreeze proteins (AFP), and to define the motifs required for ice binding, a Type III AFP suitable for two-dimensional (2D) NMR studies was produced in Escherichia coli. A synthetic gene for one of the Type III AFP isoforms was assembled in a T7 polymerase-directed expression vector. The 67-amino acid-long gene product differed from the natural AFP by inclusion of an N-terminal methionine but was indistinguishable in activity. The NMR spectra of this AFP were complicated by cis-trans proline isomerization from the C-terminal sequence YPPA. Substitution of this sequence by YAA eliminated isomer signals without altering the activity or structure of the mutant AFP. This variant (rQAE m1.1) was selected for sequential assignment and the secondary structure determination using 2D 1H NMR spectroscopy. Nine beta-strands are paired to form two triple-stranded antiparallel sheets and one double-stranded antiparallel sheet. Two further proline replacements, P29A and P33A, were made to delineate the role of conserved prolines in Type III AFP. These mutants were valuable in clarifying ambiguous NMR spectral assignments amongst the remaining six prolines of rQAE m1.1. In contrast to the replacement of the C-terminal prolyl residues, the exchange of P29 and P33 caused some structural changes and significantly decreased protein solubility and antifreeze activity.
15477100	Crystallographic studies of ligand binding by Zn-alpha2-glycoprotein.	Zn-alpha2-glycoprotein (ZAG) is a 41 kDa soluble protein that is present in most bodily fluids. The previously reported 2.8 A crystal structure of ZAG isolated from human serum demonstrated the structural similarity between ZAG and class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and revealed a non-peptidic ligand in the ZAG counterpart of the MHC peptide-binding groove. Here we present crystallographic studies to explore further the nature of the non-peptidic ligand in the ZAG groove. Comparison of the structures of several forms of recombinant ZAG, including a 1.95 A structure derived from ZAG expressed in insect cells, suggests that the non-peptidic ligand in the current structures and in the structure of serum ZAG is a polyethylene glycol (PEG), which is present in the crystallization conditions used. Further support for PEG binding in the ZAG groove is provided by the finding that PEG displaces a fluorophore-tagged fatty acid from the ZAG binding site. From these results we hypothesize that our purified forms of ZAG do not contain a bound endogenous ligand, but that the ZAG groove is capable of binding hydrophobic molecules, which may relate to its function.
1433293	Structure of native and apo carbonic anhydrase II and structure of some of its anion-ligand complexes.	In order to obtain a better structural framework for understanding the catalytic mechanism of carbonic anhydrase, a number of inhibitor complexes of the enzyme were investigated crystallographically. The three-dimensional structure of free human carbonic anhydrase II was refined at pH 7.8 (1.54 A resolution) and at pH 6.0 (1.67 A resolution). The structure around the zinc ion was identical at both pH values. The structure of the zinc-free enzyme was virtually identical with that of the native enzyme, apart from a water molecule that had moved 0.9 A to fill the space that would be occupied by the zinc ion. The complexes with the anionic inhibitors bisulfite and formate were also studied at neutral pH. Bisulfite binds with one of its oxygen atoms, presumably protonized, to the zinc ion and replaces the zinc water. Formate, lacking a hydroxyl group, is bound with its oxygen atoms not far away from the position of the non-protonized oxygen atoms of the bisulfite complex, i.e. at hydrogen bond distance from Thr199 N and at a position between the zinc ion and the hydrophobic part of the active site. The result of these and other studies have implications for our view of the catalytic function of the enzyme, since virtually all inhibitors share some features with substrate, product or expected transition states. A reaction scheme where electrophilic activation of carbon dioxide plays an important role in the hydration reaction is presented. In the reverse direction, the protonized oxygen of the bicarbonate is forced upon the zinc ion, thereby facilitating cleavage of the carbon-oxygen bond. This is achieved by the combined action of the anionic binding site, which binds carboxyl groups, the side-chain of threonine 199, which discriminates between hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, and hydrophobic interaction between substrate and the active site cavity. The required proton transfer between the zinc water and His64 can take place through water molecules 292 and 318.
16150974	Hydrogen bonding in human manganese superoxide dismutase containing 3-fluorotyrosine.	Incorporation of 3-fluorotyrosine and site-specific mutagenesis has been utilized with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and x-ray crystallography to elucidate active-site structure and the role of an active-site residue Tyr34 in human manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). Calculated harmonic frequencies at the B3LYP/6-31G** level of theory for L-tyrosine and its 3-fluorine substituted analog are compared to experimental frequencies for vibrational mode assignments. Each of the nine tyrosine residues in each of the four subunits of the homotetramer of human MnSOD was replaced with 3-fluorotyrosine. The crystal structures of the unfluorinated and fluorinated wild-type MnSOD are nearly superimposable with the root mean-square deviation for 198 alpha-carbon atoms at 0.3 A. The FTIR data show distinct vibrational modes arising from 3-fluorotyrosine in MnSOD. Comparison of spectra for wild-type and Y34F MnSOD showed that the phenolic hydroxyl of Tyr34 is hydrogen bonded, acting as a proton donor in the active site. Comparison with crystal structures demonstrates that the hydroxyl of Tyr34 is a hydrogen bond donor to an adjacent water molecule; this confirms the participation of Tyr34 in a network of residues and water molecules that extends from the active site to the adjacent subunit.
9374866	Mapping the binding site for matrix metalloproteinase on the N-terminal domain of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 by NMR chemical shift perturbation.	Changes in the NMR chemical shift of backbone amide nuclei (1H and 15N) have been used to map the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) binding site on the N-terminal domain of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (N-TIMP-2). Amide chemical shift changes were measured on formation of a stable complex with the catalytic domain of stromelysin-1 (N-MMP-3). Residues with significantly shifted amide signals mapped specifically to a broad site covering one face of the molecule. This site (the MMP binding site) consists primarily of residues 1-11, 27-41, 68-73, 87-90, and 97-104. The site overlaps with the OB-fold binding site seen in other proteins that share the same five-stranded beta-barrel topology. Sequence conservation data and recent site-directed mutagenesis studies are discussed in relation to the MMP binding site identified in this work.
15657928	Ybiv from Escherichia coli K12 is a HAD phosphatase.	The protein YbiV from Escherichia coli K12 MG1655 is a hypothetical protein with sequence homology to the haloacid dehalogenase (HAD) superfamily of proteins. Although numerous members of this family have been identified, the functions of few are known. Using the crystal structure, sequence analysis, and biochemical assays, we have characterized YbiV as a HAD phosphatase. The crystal structure of YbiV reveals a two-domain protein, one with the characteristic HAD hydrolase fold, the other an inserted alpha/beta fold. In an effort to understand the mechanism, we also solved and report the structures of YbiV in complex with beryllofluoride (BeF3-) and aluminum trifluoride (AlF3), which have been shown to mimic the phosphorylated intermediate and transition state for hydrolysis, respectively, in analogy to other HAD phosphatases. Analysis of the structures reveals the substrate-binding cavity, which is hydrophilic in nature. Both structure and sequence homology indicate YbiV may be a sugar phosphatase, which is supported by biochemical assays that measured the release of free phosphate on a number of sugar-like substrates. We also investigated available genomic and functional data in an effort to determine the physiological substrate.
10387041	Molecular recognition of macrocyclic peptidomimetic inhibitors by HIV-1 protease.	High-resolution crystal structures are described for seven macrocycles complexed with HIV-1 protease (HIVPR). The macrocycles possess two amides and an aromatic group within 15-17 membered rings designed to replace N- or C-terminal tripeptides from peptidic inhibitors of HIVPR. Appended to each macrocycle is a transition state isostere and either an acyclic peptide, nonpeptide, or another macrocycle. These cyclic analogues are potent inhibitors of HIVPR, and the crystal structures show them to be structural mimics of acyclic peptides, binding in the active site of HIVPR via the same interactions. Each macrocycle is restrained to adopt a beta-strand conformation which is preorganized for protease binding. An unusual feature of the binding of C-terminal macrocyclic inhibitors is the interaction between a positively charged secondary amine and a catalytic aspartate of HIVPR. A bicyclic inhibitor binds similarly through its secondary amine that lies between its component N-terminal and C-terminal macrocycles. In contrast, the corresponding tertiary amine of the N-terminal macrocycles does not interact with the catalytic aspartates. The amine-aspartate interaction induces a 1.5 A N-terminal translation of the inhibitors in the active site and is accompanied by weakened interactions with a water molecule that bridges the ligand to the enzyme, as well as static disorder in enzyme flap residues. This flexibility may facilitate peptide cleavage and product dissociation during catalysis. Proteases [Aba67,95]HIVPR and [Lys7,Ile33,Aba67,95]HIVPR used in this work were shown to have very similar crystal structures.
1731252	A cavity-containing mutant of T4 lysozyme is stabilized by buried benzene.	The hydrophobic cores of proteins are generally well packed, with few cavities. Mutations in which a bulky buried residue such as leucine or phenylalanine is replaced with a small residue such as alanine can create cavities in the core of a protein (our unpublished results). The sizes and shapes of such cavities can vary substantially depending on factors such as local geometry, whether or not a cavity already exists at the site of substitution, and the degree to which the protein structure relaxes to occupy the space vacated by the substituted residue. We show by crystallographic and thermodynamic analysis that the cavity created by the replacement Leu 99----Ala in T4 lysozyme is large enough to bind benzene and that ligand binding increases the melting temperature of the protein by 6.0 degrees C at pH 3.0. Benzene does not, however, bind to the cavity created by the Phe 153----Ala replacement. The results show that cavities can be engineered in proteins and suggest that such cavities might be tailored to bind specific ligands. The binding of benzene at an internal site 7 A from the molecular surface also illustrates the dynamic nature of proteins, even in crystals.
9331416	The structure of an essential splicing element: stem loop IIa from yeast U2 snRNA.	BACKGROUND: Eukaryotic genes are usually transcribed as precursor mRNAs which are then spliced, removing introns to produce functional mRNAs. Splicing is performed by the spliceosome and provides an important level of post-translational control of gene expression. Stem loop IIa from U2 small nuclear (sn)RNA is required for the efficient association of the U2 small nuclear ribonuclear protein (snRNP) with the nascent spliceosome in yeast. Genetic analysis suggests that stem loop IIa is involved in RNA-protein interactions early in splicing, and it may also interact with other RNA sequences in U2. The sequence of loop IIa is well conserved, consistent with the idea that this loop is important for function. RESULTS: We have solved the structure of U2A, a 20-base analogue of stem loop IIa from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, using NMR and restrained molecular dynamics. In the process, we have demonstrated the efficacy of a new structure calculation protocol, torsion angle molecular dynamics. The structure that has emerged, which is consistent with the in vivo chemical protection data available for stem loop IIa in the context of intact U2 snRNA, contains a sheared GA pair followed by a U-turn in the loop. The U-turn conformation, which resembles the U-turns in tRNA anticodon loops, makes this stretch of U2 snRNA an obvious target for interactions with proteins and/or other RNA sequences. CONCLUSIONS: The phenotypes of many stem loop IIa mutants can be rationalized assuming that the U-turn conformation in the loop must be preserved for efficient splicing. This observation, combined with the phylogenetic conservation of its sequence, suggests that the conformation of the loop of stem loop IIa is essential for its function in pre-mRNA splicing.
2916125	Control of enzyme activity by an engineered disulfide bond.	A novel approach to the control of enzyme catalysis is presented in which a disulfide bond engineered into the active-site cleft of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme is capable of switching the activity on and off. Two cysteines (Thr21----Cys and Thr142----Cys) were introduced by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis into the active-site cleft. These cysteines spontaneously formed a disulfide bond under oxidative conditions in vitro, and the catalytic activity of the oxidized (cross-linked) T4 lysozyme was completely lost. On exposure to reducing agent, however, the disulfide bond was rapidly broken, and the reduced (non-cross-linked) lysozyme was restored to full activity. Thus an enzyme has been engineered such that redox potential can be used to control catalytic activity.
16459338	Stabilization of the autoproteolysis of TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE) results in a novel crystal form suitable for structure-based drug design studies.	The crystallization of TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE) has been useful in understanding the structure-activity relationships of new chemical entities. However, the propensity of TACE to undergo autoproteolysis has made enzyme handling difficult and impeded the identification of inhibitor soakable crystal forms. The autoproteolysis of TACE was found to be specific (Y352-V353) and occurred within a flexible loop that is in close proximity to the P-side of the active site. The rate of autoproteolysis was found to be proportional to the concentration of TACE, suggesting a bimolecular reaction mechanism. A limited specificity study of the S(1)' subsite was conducted using surrogate peptides and suggested substitutions that would stabilize the proteolysis of the loop at positions Y352-V353. Two mutant proteases (V353G and V353S) were generated and proved to be highly resistant to autoproteolysis. The kinetics of the more resistant mutant (V353G) and wild-type TACE were compared and demonstrated virtually identical IC(50) values for a panel of competitive inhibitors. However, the k(cat)/K(m) of the mutant for a larger substrate (P6 - P(6)') was approximately 5-fold lower than that for the wild-type enzyme. Comparison of the complexed wild-type and mutant structures indicated a subtle shift in a peripheral P-side loop (comprising the mutation site) that may be involved in substrate binding/turnover and might explain the mild kinetic difference. The characterization of this stabilized form of TACE has yielded an enzyme with similar native kinetic properties and identified a novel crystal form that is suitable for inhibitor soaking and structure determination.
2261478	Structure and oxidation-reduction behavior of 1-deaza-FMN flavodoxins: modulation of redox potentials in flavodoxins.	Flavodoxins from Clostridium beijerinckii and from Megasphaera elsdenii with 1-carba-1-deaza-FMN substituted for FMN have been used to study flavin-protein interactions in flavodoxins. The oxidized 1-deaza analogue of FMN binds to apoflavodoxins from M. elsdenii and C. beijerinckii (a.k.a. Clostridium MP) with association constants (Ka) of 1.0 x 10(7) M-1 and 3.1 x 10(6) M-1, values about 10(2) less than the corresponding Ka values for FMN. X-ray structure analysis of oxidized 1-deaza-FMN flavodoxin from C. beijerinckii at 2.5-A resolution shows that the analogue binds with the flavin atoms in the same locations as their equivalents in FMN but that the protein moves in the vicinity of Gly 89 to accommodate the 1-CH group, undergoing displacements which increase the distance between position 1 of the flavin ring and the main-chain atoms of Gly 89 and move the peptide hydrogen of Gly 89 by about 0.6 A. The X-ray analysis implies that protonation of normal flavin at N(1), as would occur in formation of the neutral fully reduced species, would result in a similar structural perturbation. The oxidation-reduction potentials of 1-deaza-FMN flavodoxin from M. elsdenii have been determined in the pH range 4.5-9.2. The oxidized/semiquinone equilibrium (E'0 = -160 mV at pH 7.0) displays a pH dependence of -60 mV per pH unit; the semiquinone/reduced equilibrium (E'0 = -400 mV at pH 7.0) displays a pH dependence of -60 mV per pH unit at low pH and is pH independent at high pH, with a redox-linked pK of 7.4. Spectral changes of fully reduced 1-deaza-FMN flavodoxin with pH suggest that this latter pK corresponds to protonation of the flavin ring system (the pK of free reduced 1-deaza-FMN is 5.6 [Spencer, R., Fisher, J., & Walsh, C. (1977) Biochemistry 16, 3586-3593]. The pK of reduced 1-deaza-FMN flavodoxin provides an estimate of the electrostatic interaction between the protein and the bound prosthetic group; the free energy of binding neutral reduced 1-deaza-FMN is more negative than that for binding the anionic reduced 1-deaza-FMN by 2.4 kcal.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
9499107	Mutations in a conserved residue in the influenza virus neuraminidase active site decreases sensitivity to Neu5Ac2en-derived inhibitors.	The influenza virus neuraminidase (NA)-specific inhibitor zanamivir (4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en) is effective in humans when administered topically within the respiratory tract. The search for compounds with altered pharmacological properties has led to the identification of a novel series of influenza virus NA inhibitors in which the triol group of zanamivir has been replaced by a hydrophobic group linked by a carboxamide at the 6 position (6-carboxamide). NWS/G70C variants generated in vitro, with decreased sensitivity to 6-carboxamide, contained hemagglutinin (HA) and/or NA mutations. HA mutants bound with a decreased efficiency to the cellular receptor and were cross-resistant to all the NA inhibitors tested. The NA mutation, an Arg-to-Lys mutation, was in a previously conserved site, Arg292, which forms part of a triarginyl cluster in the catalytic site. In enzyme assays, the NA was equally resistant to zanamivir and 4-amino-Neu5Ac2en but showed greater resistance to 6-carboxamide and was most resistant to a new carbocyclic NA inhibitor, GS4071, which also has a hydrophobic side chain at the 6 position. Consistent with enzyme assays, the lowest resistance in cell culture was seen to zanamivir, more resistance was seen to 6-carboxamide, and the greatest resistance was seen to GS4071. Substrate binding and enzyme activity were also decreased in the mutant, and consequently, virus replication in both plaque assays and liquid culture was compromised. Altered binding of the hydrophobic side chain at the 6 position or the triol group could account for the decreased binding of both the NA inhibitors and substrate.
15147186	Structural, kinetic, and mutational studies of the zinc ion environment in tetrameric cytidine deaminase.	The zinc-containing cytidine deaminase (CDA, EC 3.5.4.5) is a pyrimidine salvage enzyme catalyzing the hydrolytic deamination of cytidine and 2'-deoxycytidine forming uridine and 2'-deoxyuridine, respectively. Homodimeric CDA (D-CDA) and homotetrameric CDA (T-CDA) both contain one zinc ion per subunit coordinated to the catalytic water molecule. The zinc ligands in D-CDA are one histidine and two cysteine residues, whereas in T-CDA zinc is coordinated to three cysteines. Two of the zinc coordinating cysteines in T-CDA form hydrogen bonds to the conserved residue Arg56, and this residue together with the dipole moments from two alpha-helices partially neutralizes the additional negative charge in the active site, leading to a catalytic activity similar to D-CDA. Arg56 has been substituted by a glutamine (R56Q), the corresponding residue in D-CDA, an alanine (R56A), and an aspartate (R56D). Moreover, one of the zinc-liganding cysteines has been substituted by histidine to mimic D-CDA, alone (C53H) and in combination with R56Q (C53H/R56Q). R56A, R56Q, and C53H/R56Q contain the same amount of zinc as the wild-type enzyme. The zinc-binding capacity of R56D is reduced. Only R56A, R56Q, and C53H/R56Q yielded measurable CDA activity, R56A and R56Q with similar K(m) but decreased V(max) values compared to wild-type enzyme. Because of dissociation into its inactive subunits, it was impossible to determine the kinetic parameters for C53H/R56Q. R56A and C53H/R56Q display increased apparent pK(a) values compared to the wild-type enzyme and R56Q. On the basis of the structures of R56A, R56Q, and C53H/R56Q an explanation is provided of kinetic results and the apparent instability of C53H/R56Q.
15667209	Role of water in aging of human butyrylcholinesterase inhibited by echothiophate: the crystal structure suggests two alternative mechanisms of aging.	Organophosphorus poisons (OP) bind covalently to the active-site serine of cholinesterases. The inhibited enzyme can usually be reactivated with powerful nucleophiles such as oximes. However, the covalently bound OP can undergo a suicide reaction (termed aging) yielding nonreactivatable enzyme. In human butyrylcholinesterase (hBChE), aging involves the residues His438 and Glu197 that are proximal to the active-site serine (Ser198). The mechanism of aging is known in detail for the nerve gases soman, sarin, and tabun as well as the pesticide metabolite isomalathion. Aging of soman- and sarin-inhibited acetylcholinesterase occurs by C-O bond cleavage, whereas that of tabun- and isomalathion-inhibited acetylcholinesterase occurs by P-N and P-S bond cleavage, respectively. In this work, the crystal structures of hBChE inhibited by the ophthalmic reagents echothiophate (nonaged and aged) and diisopropylfluorophosphate (aged) were solved and refined to 2.1, 2.25, and 2.2 A resolution, respectively. No appreciable shift in the position of the catalytic triad histidine was observed between the aged and nonaged conjugates of hBChE. This absence of shift contrasts with the aged and nonaged crystal structures of Torpedo californica acetylcholinesterase inhibited by the nerve agent VX. The nonaged hBChE structure shows one water molecule interacting with Glu197 and the catalytic triad histidine (His438). Interestingly, this water molecule is ideally positioned to promote aging by two mechanisms: breaking either a C-O bond or a P-O bond. Pesticides and certain stereoisomers of nerve agents are expected to undergo aging by breaking the P-O bond.
11993994	The structure of a mutant photosynthetic reaction center shows unexpected changes in main chain orientations and quinone position.	We report on the unexpected structural changes caused by substitution of acidic amino acids in the Q(B) binding pocket of the bacterial photosynthetic reaction center by alanines. The mutations targeted key residues L212Glu and L213Asp of this transmembrane protein-cofactor complex. The amino acid substitutions in the L212Ala-L213Ala mutant reaction center ("AA") were known to affect the delivery of protons after the light-induced generation of Q(B)(-), which renders the AA strain incapable of photosynthetic growth. The AA structure not only revealed side chain rearrangements but also showed movement of the main chain segments that are contiguous with the mutation sites. The alanine substitutions caused an expansion of the cavity rather than its collapse. In addition, Q(B) is found mainly in the binding site that is proximal to the iron-ligand complex (closest to Q(A)) as opposed to its distal binding site (furthest from Q(A)) in the structure of the wild-type reaction center. The observed rearrangements in the structure of the AA reaction center establish a new balance between charged residues of an interactive network near Q(B). This structurally and electrostatically altered complex forms the basis for future understanding of the structural basis for proton transfer in active reaction centers which retain the alanine substitutions but carry a distant compensatory mutation.
8869640	An engineered Staphylococcus aureus PC1 beta-lactamase that hydrolyses third-generation cephalosporins.	The beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 has been cloned into an Escherichia coli vector for site-directed mutagenesis and high-level protein expression. A mutant enzyme has been produced in which Ala238 is replaced by a serine, and Ile239 is deleted (A238S:I239del). The engineered enzyme hydrolyses third-generation cephalosporins substantially more rapidly than the parental enzyme does, while hydrolysis of benzylpenicillin is slower with the mutant than with the wild-type and native enzymes. The mutant beta-lactamase has been crystallized and the structure determined and refined at 2.8 A resolution. The disposition of the beta-strand which forms the side of the active site is altered in comparison with the native S. aureus beta-lactamase structure, widening the active site cleft and providing space to accommodate the bulky side-chains of the third-generation cephalosporins.
15095972	Crystal structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptases mutated at codons 100, 106 and 108 and mechanisms of resistance to non-nucleoside inhibitors.	Leu100Ile, Val106Ala and Val108Ile are mutations in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) that are observed in the clinic and give rise to resistance to certain non-nucleoside inhibitors (NNRTIs) including the first-generation drug nevirapine. In order to investigate structural mechanisms of resistance for different NNRTI classes we have determined six crystal structures of mutant RT-inhibitor complexes. Val108 does not have direct contact with nevirapine in wild-type RT and in the RT(Val108Ile) complex the biggest change observed is at the distally positioned Tyr181 which is > 8 A from the mutation site. Thus in contrast to most NNRTI resistance mutations RT(Val108Ile) appears to act via an indirect mechanism which in this case is through alterations of the ring stacking interactions of the drug particularly with Tyr181. Shifts in side-chain and inhibitor positions compared to wild-type RT are observed in complexes of nevirapine and the second-generation NNRTI UC-781 with RT(Leu100Ile) and RT(Val106Ala), leading to perturbations in inhibitor contacts with Tyr181 and Tyr188. Such perturbations are likely to be a factor contributing to the greater loss of binding for nevirapine compared to UC-781 as, in the former case, a larger proportion of binding energy is derived from aromatic ring stacking of the inhibitor with the tyrosine side-chains. The differing resistance profiles of first and second generation NNRTIs for other drug resistance mutations in RT may also be in part due to this indirect mechanism.
7634071	Parallel evolution in two homologues of phosphorylase.	The structure of the unphosphorylated, inactive form of yeast glycogen phosphorylase has been determined to a resolution of 2.6 A. The structure is similar to the phosphorylated, active form of muscle phosphorylase in the orientations of the subunits and catalytic residues, but resembles the inactive muscle enzyme in the closed, or substrate excluding, orientation of the two domains. Part of the unique yeast amino-terminal extension of 40 residues binds near the catalytic site of the second subunit in the homodimer, preventing the domain movement required for substrate access. Phosphorylation may displace the amino terminus from the active site, allowing the domains to separate.
2544734	Three-dimensional structures of drug-resistant mutants of human rhinovirus 14.	Mutants of human rhinovirus 14 were isolated and characterized by searching for resistance to compounds that inhibit viral uncoating. The portions of the RNA that code for amino acids that surround the antiviral compound binding site were sequenced. X-ray analysis of two of these mutants, 1188 Val----Leu and 1199 Cys----Tyr, shows that these were single-site substitutions which would sterically hinder drug binding. Differences in the resistance of mutant viruses to various antiviral compounds may be rationalized in terms of the three-dimensional structures of these mutants. Predictions of the structures of mutant rhinovirus 14 with the substitutions 1188 Val----Leu, 1199 Cys----Tyr and 1199 Cys----Trp in VP1 were made using a molecular dynamics technique. The predicted structure of the 1199 Cys----Tyr mutant was consistent with the electron density map, while the 1188 Val----Leu prediction was not. Large (up to 1.4 A) conformational differences between native rhinovirus 14 and the 1199 Cys----Tyr mutant occurred in main-chain atoms near the mutation site. These changes, as well as the orientation of the 1199 tyrosine side-chain, were correctly predicted by the molecular dynamics calculation. The structure of the predicted 1199 Cys----Trp mutation is consistent with the drug-resistant properties of this virus.
2179047	Characterization and nucleotide sequence of the cryptic cel operon of Escherichia coli K12.	Wild-type Escherichia coli are not able to utilize beta-glucoside sugars because the genes for utilization of these sugars are cryptic. Spontaneous mutations in the cel operon allow its expression and enable the organism to ferment cellobiose, arbutin and salicin. In this report we describe the structure and nucleotide sequence of the cel operon. The cel operon consists of five genes: celA, whose function is unknown; celB and celC which encode phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system enzyme IIcel and enzyme IIIcel, respectively, for the transport and phosphorylation of beta-glucoside sugars; celD, which encodes a negative regulatory protein; and celF, which encodes a phospho-beta-glucosidase that acts on phosphorylated cellobiose, arbutin and salicin. The mutationally activated cel operon is induced in the presence of its substrates, and is repressed in their absence. A comparison of proteins encoded by the cel operon with functionally equivalent proteins of the bgl operon, another cryptic E. coli gene system responsible for the catabolism of beta-glucoside sugars, revealed no significant homology between these two systems despite common functional characteristics. The celD and celF encoded repressor and phospho-beta-glucosidase proteins are homologous to the melibiose regulatory protein and to the melA encoded alpha-galactosidase of E. coli, respectively. Furthermore, the celC encoded PEP-dependent phosphotransferase system enzyme IIIcel is strikingly homologous to an enzyme IIIlac of the Gram-positive organism Staphylococcus aureus. We conclude that the genes for these two enzyme IIIs diverged much more recently than did their hosts, indicating that E. coli and S. aureus have undergone relatively recent exchange of chromosomal genes.
8070397	Three-dimensional structure of the ribosomal translocase: elongation factor G from Thermus thermophilus.	The crystal structure of Thermus thermophilus elongation factor G without guanine nucleotide was determined to 2.85 A. This GTPase has five domains with overall dimensions of 50 x 60 x 118 A. The GTP binding domain has a core common to other GTPases with a unique subdomain which probably functions as an intrinsic nucleotide exchange factor. Domains I and II are homologous to elongation factor Tu and their arrangement, both with and without GDP, is more similar to elongation factor Tu in complex with a GTP analogue than with GDP. Domains III and V show structural similarities to ribosomal proteins. Domain IV protrudes from the main body of the protein and has an extraordinary topology with a left-handed cross-over connection between two parallel beta-strands.
11223513	Structures of two highly homologous bacterial L-asparaginases: a case of enantiomorphic space groups.	Quasi-enantiomorphic crystals of the Y25F mutant of Escherichia coli L-asparaginase and of the native Erwinia chrysanthemi L-asparaginase were obtained in the hexagonal space groups P6(5)22 and P6(1)22, respectively. The structures of these highly homologous enzymes were solved by molecular replacement and were refined with data extending to 2.2-2.5 A. These structures were compared with each other, as well as with other L-asparaginase structures previously observed with different crystal packing. It is concluded that the observed phenomenon, which is rare, was most likely to have arisen by chance.
15368576	NMR and modeling studies of protein-carbohydrate interactions: synthesis, three-dimensional structure, and recognition properties of a minimum hevein domain with binding affinity for chitooligosaccharides.	HEV32, a 32-residue, truncated hevein lacking eleven C-terminal amino acids, was synthesized by solid-phase methodology and correctly folded with three cysteine bridge pairs. The affinities of HEV32 for small chitin fragments--in the forms of N,N',N"-triacetylchitotriose ((GlcNAc)3) (millimolar) and N,N',N",N"',N"",N""'-hexaacetylchitohexaose ((GlcNAc)6) (micromolar)--as measured by NMR and fluorescence methods, are comparable with those of native hevein. The HEV32 ligand-binding process is enthalpy driven, while entropy opposes binding. The NMR structure of ligand-bound HEV32 in aqueous solution was determined to be highly similar to the NMR structure of ligand-bound hevein. Solvated molecular-dynamics simulations were performed in order to monitor the changes in side-chain conformation of the binding site of HEV32 and hevein upon interaction with ligands. The calculations suggest that the Trp21 side-chain orientation of HEV32 in the free form differs from that in the bound state; this agrees with fluorescence and thermodynamic data. HEV32 provides a simple molecular model for studying protein-carbohydrate interactions and for understanding the physiological relevance of small native hevein domains lacking C-terminal residues.
10966813	Specificity in protein-protein interactions: the structural basis for dual recognition in endonuclease colicin-immunity protein complexes.	Bacteria producing endonuclease colicins are protected against their cytotoxic activity by virtue of a small immunity protein that binds with high affinity and specificity to inactivate the endonuclease. DNase binding by the immunity protein occurs through a "dual recognition" mechanism in which conserved residues from helix III act as the binding-site anchor, while variable residues from helix II define specificity. We now report the 1.7 A crystal structure of the 24.5 kDa complex formed between the endonuclease domain of colicin E9 and its cognate immunity protein Im9, which provides a molecular rationale for this mechanism. Conserved residues of Im9 form a binding-energy hotspot through a combination of backbone hydrogen bonds to the endonuclease, many via buried solvent molecules, and hydrophobic interactions at the core of the interface, while the specificity-determining residues interact with corresponding specificity side-chains on the enzyme. Comparison between the present structure and that reported recently for the colicin E7 endonuclease domain in complex with Im7 highlights how specificity is achieved by very different interactions in the two complexes, predominantly hydrophobic in nature in the E9-Im9 complex but charged in the E7-Im7 complex. A key feature of both complexes is the contact between a conserved tyrosine residue from the immunity proteins (Im9 Tyr54) with a specificity residue on the endonuclease directing it toward the specificity sites of the immunity protein. Remarkably, this tyrosine residue and its neighbour (Im9 Tyr55) are the pivots of a 19 degrees rigid-body rotation that relates the positions of Im7 and Im9 in the two complexes. This rotation does not affect conserved immunity protein interactions with the endonuclease but results in different regions of the specificity helix being presented to the enzyme.
12202494	Electrostatic effects and binding determinants in the catalysis of prolyl oligopeptidase. Site specific mutagenesis at the oxyanion binding site.	Prolyl oligopeptidase, a member of a new family of serine peptidases, plays an important role in memory disorders. Earlier x-ray crystallographic investigations indicated that stabilization of the tetrahedral transition state of the reaction involved hydrogen bond formation between the oxyanion of the tetrahedral intermediate and the OH group of Tyr(473). The contribution of the OH group was tested with the Y473F variant using various substrates. The charged succinyl-Gly-Pro-4-nitroanilide was hydrolyzed with a much lower k(cat)/K(m) compared with the neutral benzyloxycarbonyl-G1y-Pro-2-naphthylamide, although the binding modes of the two substrates were similar, as shown by x-ray crystallography. This suggested that electrostatic interactions between Arg(643) and the succinyl group competed with the productive binding mechanism. Unlike most enzyme reactions, catalysis by the wild-type enzyme exhibited positive activation entropy. In contrast, the activation entropy for the Y473F variant was negative, suggesting that the tyrosine OH group is involved in stabilizing both the transition state and the water shell at the active site. Importantly, Tyr(473) is also implicated in the formation of the enzyme-substrate complex. The nonlinear Arrhenius plot suggested a greater significance of the oxyanion binding site at physiological temperature. The results indicated that Tyr(473) was more needed at high pH, at high temperature, and with charged substrates exhibiting "internally competitive inhibition."
15170341	Role of hydrogen bonding in the active site of human manganese superoxide dismutase.	The side chain of Gln143, a conserved residue in manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), forms a hydrogen bond with the manganese-bound solvent and is critical in maintaining catalytic activity. The side chains of Tyr34 and Trp123 form hydrogen bonds with the carboxamide of Gln143. We have replaced Tyr34 and Trp123 with Phe in single and double mutants of human MnSOD and measured their catalytic activity by stopped-flow spectrophotometry and pulse radiolysis. The replacements of these side chains inhibited steps in the catalysis as much as 50-fold; in addition, they altered the gating between catalysis and formation of a peroxide complex to yield a more product-inhibited enzyme. The replacement of both Tyr34 and Trp123 in a double mutant showed that these two residues interact cooperatively in maintaining catalytic activity. The crystal structure of Y34F/W123F human MnSOD at 1.95 A resolution suggests that this effect is not related to a conformational change in the side chain of Gln143, which does not change orientation in Y34F/W123F, but rather to more subtle electronic effects due to the loss of hydrogen bonding to the carboxamide side chain of Gln143. Wild-type MnSOD containing Trp123 and Tyr34 has approximately the same thermal stability compared with mutants containing Phe at these positions, suggesting the hydrogen bonds formed by these residues have functional rather than structural roles.
8946854	Buried polar residues and structural specificity in the GCN4 leucine zipper.	A conserved asparagine (Asn 16) buried in the interface of the GCN4 leucine zipper selectively favours the parallel, dimeric, coiled-coil structure. To test if other polar residues confer oligomerization specificity, the structural effects of Gln and Lys substitutions for Asn 16 were characterized. Like the wild-type peptide, the Asn 16Lys mutant formed exclusively dimers. In contrast, Gln 16, despite its chemical similarity to Asn, allowed the peptide to form both dimers and trimers. The Gln 16 side chain was accommodated by qualitatively different interactions in the dimer and trimer crystal structures. These findings demonstrate that the structural selectivity of polar residues results not only from the burial of polar atoms, but also depends on the complementarity of the side-chain stereochemistry with the surrounding structural environment.
7500345	Kinetic and structural characterization of mutations of glycine 216 in alpha-lytic protease: a new target for engineering substrate specificity.	Gly216 in the active site of the broadly specific MA190 mutant of alpha-lytic protease has been found to be remarkably tolerant of amino acid substitutions. Side-chains as large as Trp can be accommodated within the substrate-binding pocket without abolishing catalysis, and have major effects upon the substrate specificity of the enzyme. Kinetic characterization of eleven enzymatically active mutants against a panel of eight substrates clearly revealed the functional consequences of the substitutions at position 216. To understand better the structural basis for their altered specificity, the GA216 + MA190 and GL216 + MA190 mutants have been crystallized both with and without a representative series of peptide boronic acid transition-state analog inhibitors. An empirical description and non-parametric statistical analysis of structural variation among these enzyme: inhibitor complexes is presented. The roles of active site plasticity and dynamics in alpha-lytic protease function and substrate preference are also addressed. The results strongly suggest that substrate specificity determination in alpha-lytic protease is a distributed property of the active site and substrate molecule.
12192070	Characterization and multiple molecular forms of TorD from Shewanella massilia, the putative chaperone of the molybdoenzyme TorA.	Several bacteria use trimethylamine N-oxyde (TMAO) as an exogenous electron acceptor for anaerobic respiration. This metabolic pathway involves expression of the tor operon that codes for a periplasmic molybdopterin-containing reductase of the DMSO/TMAO family, a pentahemic c-type cytochrome, and the TorD cytoplasmic chaperone, possibly required for acquisition of the molybdenum cofactor and translocation of the reductase by the twin-arginine translocation system. In this report, we show that the TorD chaperone from Shewanella massilia forms multiple and stable oligomeric species. The monomeric, dimeric, and trimeric forms were purified to homogeneity and characterized by analytical ultracentrifugation. Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and preliminary diffraction data indicated that the TorD dimer is made of identical protein modules of similar size to the monomeric species. Interconversion of the native oligomeric forms occurred at acidic pH value. In this condition, ANS fluorescence indicates a non-native conformation of the polypeptide chain in which, according to the circular dichroism spectra, the alpha-helical content is similar to that of the native species. Surface plasmon resonance showed that both the monomeric and dimeric species bind the mature TorA enzyme, but that the dimer binds its target protein more efficiently. The possible biologic significance of these oligomers is discussed in relation to the chaperone activity of TorD, and to the ability of another member of the TorD family to bind the Twin Arginine leader sequences of the precursor of DMSO/TMAO reductases.
12364331	Oligosaccharide and sucrose complexes of amylosucrase. Structural implications for the polymerase activity.	The glucosyltransferase amylosucrase is structurally quite similar to the hydrolase alpha-amylase. How this switch in functionality is achieved is an important and fundamental question. The inactive E328Q amylosucrase variant has been co-crystallized with maltoheptaose, and the structure was determined by x-ray crystallography to 2.2 A resolution, revealing a maltoheptaose binding site in the B'-domain somewhat distant from the active site. Additional soaking of these crystals with maltoheptaose resulted in replacement of Tris in the active site with maltoheptaose, allowing the mapping of the -1 to +5 binding subsites. Crystals of amylosucrase were soaked with sucrose at different concentrations. The structures at approximately 2.1 A resolution revealed three new binding sites of different affinity. The highest affinity binding site is close to the active site but is not in the previously identified substrate access channel. Allosteric regulation seems necessary to facilitate access from this binding site. The structures show the pivotal role of the B'-domain in the transferase reaction. Based on these observations, an extension of the hydrolase reaction mechanism valid for this enzyme can be proposed. In this mechanism, the glycogen-like polymer is bound in the widest access channel to the active site. The polymer binding introduces structural changes that allow sucrose to migrate from its binding site into the active site and displace the polymer.
12144785	Structural bases of stability-function tradeoffs in enzymes.	The structures of enzymes reflect two tendencies that appear opposed. On one hand, they fold into compact, stable structures; on the other hand, they bind a ligand and catalyze a reaction. To be stable, enzymes fold to maximize favorable interactions, forming a tightly packed hydrophobic core, exposing hydrophilic groups, and optimizing intramolecular hydrogen-bonding. To be functional, enzymes carve out an active site for ligand binding, exposing hydrophobic surface area, clustering like charges, and providing unfulfilled hydrogen bond donors and acceptors. Using AmpC beta-lactamase, an enzyme that is well-characterized structurally and mechanistically, the relationship between enzyme stability and function was investigated by substituting key active-site residues and measuring the changes in stability and activity. Substitutions of catalytic residues Ser64, Lys67, Tyr150, Asn152, and Lys315 decrease the activity of the enzyme by 10(3)-10(5)-fold compared to wild-type. Concomitantly, many of these substitutions increase the stability of the enzyme significantly, by up to 4.7kcal/mol. To determine the structural origins of stabilization, the crystal structures of four mutant enzymes were determined to between 1.90A and 1.50A resolution. These structures revealed several mechanisms by which stability was increased, including mimicry of the substrate by the substituted residue (S64D), relief of steric strain (S64G), relief of electrostatic strain (K67Q), and improved polar complementarity (N152H). These results suggest that the preorganization of functionality characteristic of active sites has come at a considerable cost to enzyme stability. In proteins of unknown function, the presence of such destabilized regions may indicate the presence of a binding site.
15637152	Solution NMR-derived global fold of a monomeric 82-kDa enzyme.	The size of proteins that can be studied by solution NMR spectroscopy has increased significantly because of recent developments in methodology. Important experiments include those that make use of approaches that increase the lifetimes of NMR signals or that define the orientation of internuclear bond vectors with respect to a common molecular frame. The advances in NMR techniques are strongly coupled to isotope labeling methods that increase sensitivity and reduce the complexity of NMR spectra. We show that these developments can be exploited in structural studies of high-molecular-weight, single-polypeptide proteins, and we present the solution global fold of the monomeric 723-residue (82-kDa) enzyme malate synthase G from Escherichia coli, which has been extensively characterized by NMR in the past several years.
11478862	Structure and mechanism of the RuvB Holliday junction branch migration motor.	The RuvB hexamer is the chemomechanical motor of the RuvAB complex that migrates Holliday junction branch-points in DNA recombination and the rescue of stalled DNA replication forks. The 1.6 A crystal structure of Thermotoga maritima RuvB together with five mutant structures reveal that RuvB is an ATPase-associated with diverse cellular activities (AAA+-class ATPase) with a winged-helix DNA-binding domain. The RuvB-ADP complex structure and mutagenesis suggest how AAA+-class ATPases couple nucleotide binding and hydrolysis to interdomain conformational changes and asymmetry within the RuvB hexamer implied by the crystallographic packing and small-angle X-ray scattering in solution. ATP-driven domain motion is positioned to move double-stranded DNA through the hexamer and drive conformational changes between subunits by altering the complementary hydrophilic protein- protein interfaces. Structural and biochemical analysis of five motifs in the protein suggest that ATP binding is a strained conformation recognized both by sensors and the Walker motifs and that intersubunit activation occurs by an arginine finger motif reminiscent of the GTPase-activating proteins. Taken together, these results provide insights into how RuvB functions as a motor for branch migration of Holliday junctions.
8962085	Ordered water molecules as key allosteric mediators in a cooperative dimeric hemoglobin.	One of the most remarkable structural aspects of Scapharca dimeric hemoglobin is the disruption of a very well-ordered water cluster at the subunit interface upon ligand binding. We have explored the role of these crystallographically observed water molecules by site-directed mutagenesis and osmotic stress techniques. The isosteric mutation of Thr-72-->Val in the interface increases oxygen affinity more than 40-fold with a surprising enhancement of cooperativity. The only significant structural effect of this mutation is to destabilize two ordered water molecules in the deoxy interface. Wild-type Scapharca hemoglobin is strongly sensitive to osmotic conditions. Upon addition of glycerol, striking changes in Raman spectrum of the deoxy form are observed that indicate a transition toward the liganded form. Increased osmotic pressure, which lowers the oxygen affinity in human hemoglobin, raises the oxygen affinity of Scapharca hemoglobin regardless of whether the solute is glycerol, glucose, or sucrose. Analysis of these results provides an estimate of six water molecules lost upon oxygen binding to the dimer, in good agreement with eight predicted from crystal structures. These experiments suggest that the observed cluster of interfacial water molecules plays a crucial role in communication between subunits.
8676387	Thermodynamic and structural compensation in "size-switch" core repacking variants of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme.	Previous analysis of randomly generated multiple mutations within the core of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme suggested that the "large-to-small" substitution Leu121 to Ala (L121A) and the spatially adjacent "small-to-large" substitution Ala129 to Met (A129M) might be mutually compensating. To test this hypothesis, the individual variants L121A and A129M were generated, as well as the double "size-switch" mutant L121A/A129M. To make the interchange symmetrical, the combination of L121A with A129L to give L121A/A129L was also constructed. The single mutations were all destabilizing. Somewhat surprisingly, the small-to-large substitutions, which increase hydrophobic stabilization but can also introduce strain, were less deleterious than the large-to-small replacements. Both Ala129 --> Leu and Ala129 --> Met offset the destabilization of L121A by about 50%. Also, in contrast to typical Leu --> Ala core substitutions, which destabilize by 2 to 5 kcal/mol, Leu121 --> Ala slightly stabilized A129L and A129M. Crystal structure analysis showed that a combination of side-chain and backbone adjustments partially accommodated changes in side-chain volume, but only to a limited degree. For example, the cavity that was created by the Leu121 to Ala replacement actually became larger in L121A/A129L. The results demonstrate that the destabilization associated with a change in volume of one core residue can be specifically compensated by an offsetting volume change in an adjacent residue. It appears, however, that complete compensation is unlikely because it is difficult to reconstitute an equivalent set of interactions. The relatively slow evolution of core relative to surface residues appears, therefore, to be due to two factors. First, a mutation in a single core residue that results in a substantial change in size will normally lead to a significant loss in stability. Such mutations will presumably be selected against. Second, if a change in bulk does occur in a buried residue, it cannot normally be fully compensated by a mutation of an adjacent residue. Thus, the most probable response will tend to be reversion to the parent protein.
11384233	2-Amino-6-arylsulfonylbenzonitriles as non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors of HIV-1.	A series of 2-amino-5-arylthiobenzonitriles (1) was found to be active against HIV-1. Structural modifications led to the sulfoxides (2) and sulfones (3). The sulfoxides generally showed antiviral activity against HIV-1 similar to that of 1. The sulfones, however, were the most potent series of analogues, a number having activity against HIV-1 in the nanomolar range. Structural-activity relationship (SAR) studies suggested that a meta substituent, particularly a meta methyl substituent, invariably increased antiviral activities. However, optimal antiviral activities were manifested by compounds where both meta groups in the arylsulfonyl moiety were substituted and one of the substituents was a methyl group. Such a disubstitution led to compounds 3v, 3w, 3x, and 3y having IC50 values against HIV-1 in the low nanomolar range. When gauged for their broad-spectrum antiviral activity against key non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) related mutants, all the di-meta-substituted sulfones 3u-z and the 2-naphthyl analogue 3ee generally showed single-digit nanomolar activity against the V106A and P236L strains and submicromolar to low nanomolar activity against strains E138K, V108I, and Y188C. However, they showed a lack of activity against the K103N and Y181C mutant viruses. The elucidation of the X-ray crystal structure of the complex of 3v (739W94) in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase showed an overlap in the binding domain when compared with the complex of nevirapine in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. The X-ray structure allowed for the rationalization of SAR data and potencies of the compounds against the mutants.
10843854	Crystal structure of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAK pilin suggests a main-chain-dominated mode of receptor binding.	Fibers of pilin monomers (pili) form the dominant adhesin of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and they play an important role in infections by this opportunistic bacterial pathogen. Blocking adhesion is therefore a target for vaccine development. The receptor-binding site is located in a C-terminal disulphide-bonded loop of each pilin monomer, but functional binding sites are displayed only at the tip of the pilus. A factor complicating vaccination is that different bacterial strains produce distinct, and sometimes highly divergent, pilin variants. It is surprising that all strains still appear to bind a common receptor, asialo-GM1. Here, we present the 1.63 A crystal structure of pilin from P. aeruginosa strain PAK. The structure shows that the proposed receptor-binding site is formed by two beta-turns that create a surface dominated by main-chain atoms. Receptor specificity could therefore be maintained, whilst allowing side-chain variation, if the main-chain conformation is conserved. The location of the binding site relative to the proposed packing of the pilus fiber raises new issues and suggests that the current fiber model may have to be reconsidered. Finally, the structure of the C-terminal disulphide-bonded loop will provide the template for the structure-based design of a consensus sequence vaccine.
1583688	1.7 A X-ray structure of the periplasmic ribose receptor from Escherichia coli.	The X-ray structure of the periplasmic ribose receptor (binding protein) of Escherichia coli (RBP) was solved at 3 A resolution by the method of multiple isomorphous replacement. Alternating cycles of refitting and refinement have resulted in a model structure with an R-factor of 18.7% for 27,526 reflections from 7.5 to 1.7 A resolution (96% of the data). The model contains 2228 non-hydrogen atoms, including all 271 residues of the amino acid sequence, 220 solvent atoms and beta-D-ribose. The protein consists of two highly similar structural domains, each of which is composed of a core of parallel beta-sheet flanked on both sides by alpha-helices. The two domains are related to each other by an almost perfect 2-fold axis of rotation, with the C termini of the beta-strands of each sheet pointing toward the center of the molecule. Three short stretches of amino acid chain (from symmetrically related portions of the protein) link these two domains, and presumably act as a hinge to allow relative movement of the domains in functionally important conformational changes. Two water molecules are also an intrinsic part of the hinge, allowing crucial flexibility in the structure. The ligand beta-D-ribose (in the pyranose form) is bound between the domains, held by interactions with side-chains of the interior loops. The binding site is precisely tailored, with a combination of hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic and steric effects giving rise to tight binding (0.1 microM for ribose) and high specificity. Four out of seven binding-site residues are charged (2 each of aspartate and arginine) and contribute two hydrogen bonds each. The remaining hydrogen bonds are contributed by asparagine and glutamine residues. Three phenylalanine residues supply the hydrophobic component, packing against both faces of the sugar molecule. The arrangement of these hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic residues results in an enclosed binding site with the exact shape of the allowed sugar molecules; in the process of binding, the ligand loses all of its surface-accessible area. The sites of two mutations that affect the rate of folding of the ribose receptor are shown to be located near small cavities in the wild-type protein. The cavities thus allow the incorporation of the larger residues in the mutant proteins. Since these alterations would seriously affect the ability of the protein to build the first portion of the hydrophobic core in the first domain, it is proposed that this process is the rate-limiting step in folding of the ribose receptor.
8994974	The structural basis for pyrophosphatase catalysis.	BACKGROUND: Soluble inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPase), an essential enzyme central to phosphorus metabolism, catalyzes the hydrolysis of the phosphoanhydride bond in inorganic pyrophosphate. Catalysis requires divalent metal ions which affect the apparent pKas of the essential general acid and base on the enzyme, and the pKa of the substrate. Three to five metal ions are required for maximal activity, depending on pH and enzyme source. A detailed understanding of catalysis would aid both in understanding the nature of biological mechanisms of phosphoryl transfer, and in understanding the role of divalent cations. Without a high-resolution complex structure such a model has previously been unobtainable. RESULTS: We report the first two high-resolution structures of yeast PPase, at 2.2 and 2.0 A resolution with R factors of around 17%. One structure contains the two activating metal ions; the other, the product (MnPi)2 as well. The latter structure shows an extensive network of hydrogen bond and metal ion interactions that account for virtually every lone pair on the product phosphates. It also contains a water molecule/hydroxide ion bridging two metal ions and, uniquely, a phosphate bound to four Mn2+ ions. CONCLUSIONS: Our structure-based model of the PPase mechanism posits that the nucleophile is the hydroxide ion mentioned above. This aspect of the mechanism is formally analogous to the "two-metal ion' mechanism of alkaline phosphatase, exonucleases and polymerases. A third metal ion coordinates another water molecule that is probably the required general acid. Extensive Lewis acid coordination and hydrogen bonds provide charge shielding of the electrophile and lower the pKa of the leaving group. This "three-metal ion' mechanism is in detail different from that of other phosphoryl transfer enzymes, presumably reflecting how ancient the reaction is.
9677301	A general rule for the relationship between hydrophobic effect and conformational stability of a protein: stability and structure of a series of hydrophobic mutants of human lysozyme.	To get a general rule for the relationship between hydrophobic effect and conformational stability, five Ile to Val and nine Val to Ala mutants (3SS mutants) from 3SS (C77A/C95A) human lysozyme were constructed. As known from previous studies, the 3SS protein lacking a disulfide bond between Cys77 and Cys95 is destabilized by enthalpic factors, as revealed by a decrease of about 20 kJ/mol in the denaturation Gibbs energy change (DeltaG) value, as compared to the wild-type protein, which has four disulfide bonds. In this study, the stabilities and structures of the 3SS mutants were determined by differential scanning calorimetry and X-ray crystal analysis, respectively, and compared with those of the mutants (4SS mutants) from the wild-type (4SS) protein published previously.The stabilities of all the 3SS mutants, except for V110A-3SS were decreased as compared with that of the 3SS protein, coinciding with the results for the 4SS mutants. The change in the denaturation Gibbs energy change (DeltaDeltaG) values of the 3SS mutants relative to the 3SS protein at the denaturation temperature (49.2 degreesC) of the 3SS protein at pH 2.7 were similar to those of the equivalent 4SS mutants relative to the wild-type at 64.9 degreesC.The Delta DeltaG values of the 3SS mutants correlated with the changes in hydrophobic surface area exposed upon denaturation (Delta DeltaASAHP) for all of the hydrophobic residues when the effects of the secondary structure propensity were considered. This correlation is identical with that previously found for the 4SS mutants. The linear relation between Delta DeltaG and Delta DeltaASAHP for all of the hydrophobic residues with the same slope was found also for the mutants of T4 lysozyme already reported, indicating that this is a general relationship between changes in conformational stability and changes in ASA values of hydrophobic residues due to mutations.
15557262	On the use of DXMS to produce more crystallizable proteins: structures of the T. maritima proteins TM0160 and TM1171.	The structure of two Thermotoga maritima proteins, a conserved hypothetical protein (TM0160) and a transcriptional regulator (TM1171), have now been determined at 1.9 A and 2.3 A resolution, respectively, as part of a large-scale structural genomics project. Our first efforts to crystallize full-length versions of these targets were unsuccessful. However, analysis of the recombinant purified proteins using the technique of enhanced amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectroscopy (DXMS) revealed substantial regions of rapid amide deuterium hydrogen exchange, consistent with flexible regions of the structures. Based on these exchange data, truncations were designed to selectively remove the disordered C-terminal regions, and the resulting daughter proteins showed greatly enhanced crystallizability. Comparative DXMS analysis of full-length protein versus truncated forms demonstrated complete and exact preservation of the exchange rate profiles in the retained sequence, indicative of conservation of the native folded structure. This study presents the first structures produced with the aid of the DXMS method for salvaging intractable crystallization targets. The structure of TM0160 represents a new fold and highlights the use of this approach where any prior structural knowledge is absent. The structure of TM1171 represents an example where the lack of a substrate/cofactor may impair crystallization. The details of both structures are presented and discussed.
10350464	Crystal structure of thiamin phosphate synthase from Bacillus subtilis at 1.25 A resolution.	The crystal structure of Bacillus subtilis thiamin phosphate synthase complexed with the reaction products thiamin phosphate and pyrophosphate has been determined by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction phasing techniques and refined to 1.25 A resolution. Thiamin phosphate synthase is an alpha/beta protein with a triosephosphate isomerase fold. The active site is in a pocket formed primarily by the loop regions, residues 59-67 (A loop, joining alpha3 and beta2), residues 109-114 (B loop, joining alpha5 and beta4), and residues 151-168 (C loop, joining alpha7 and beta6). The high-resolution structure of thiamin phosphate synthase complexed with its reaction products described here provides a detailed picture of the catalytically important interactions between the enzyme and the substrates. The structure and other mechanistic studies are consistent with a reaction mechanism involving the ionization of 4-amino-2-methyl-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate at the active site to give the pyrimidine carbocation. Trapping of the carbocation by the thiazole followed by product dissociation completes the reaction. The ionization step is catalyzed by orienting the C-O bond perpendicular to the plane of the pyrimidine, by hydrogen bonding between the C4' amino group and one of the terminal oxygen atoms of the pyrophosphate, and by extensive hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions between the pyrophosphate and the enzyme.
8248779	A switch between two-, three-, and four-stranded coiled coils in GCN4 leucine zipper mutants.	Coiled-coil sequences in proteins consist of heptad repeats containing two characteristic hydrophobic positions. The role of these buried hydrophobic residues in determining the structures of coiled coils was investigated by studying mutants of the GCN4 leucine zipper. When sets of buried residues were altered, two-, three-, and four-helix structures were formed. The x-ray crystal structure of the tetramer revealed a parallel, four-stranded coiled coil. In the tetramer conformation, the local packing geometry of the two hydrophobic positions in the heptad repeat is reversed relative to that in the dimer. These studies demonstrate that conserved, buried residues in the GCN4 leucine zipper direct dimer formation. In contrast to proposals that the pattern of hydrophobic and polar amino acids in a protein sequence is sufficient to determine three-dimensional structure, the shapes of buried side chains in coiled coils are essential determinants of the global fold.
8967954	Structural basis for selective inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 by anti-inflammatory agents.	Prostaglandins and glucocorticoids are potent mediators of inflammation. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) exert their effects by inhibition of prostaglandin production. The pharmacological target of NSAIDs is cyclooxygenase (COX, also known as PGH synthase), which catalyses the first committed step in arachidonic-acid metabolism. Two isoforms of the membrane protein COX are known: COX-1, which is constitutively expressed in most tissues, is responsible for the physiological production of prostaglandins; and COX-2, which is induced by cytokines, mitogens and endotoxins in inflammatory cells, is responsible for the elevated production of prostaglandins during inflammation. The structure of ovine COX-1 complexed with several NSAIDs has been determined. Here we report the structures of unliganded murine COX-2 and complexes with flurbiprofen, indomethacin and SC-558, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, determined at 3.0 to 2.5 A resolution. These structures explain the structural basis for the selective inhibition of COX-2, and demonstrate some of the conformational changes associated with time-dependent inhibition.
10508408	Structural consequences of the B5 histidine --> tyrosine mutation in human insulin characterized by X-ray crystallography and conformational analysis.	The addition of phenols to hexameric insulin solutions produces a particularly stable hexamer, resulting from a rearrangement in which residues B1-B8 change from an extended conformation (T-state) to form an alpha-helix (R-state). The R-state is, in part, stabilized by nonpolar interactions between the phenolic molecule and residue B5 His at the dimer-dimer interface. The B5 His --> Tyr mutant human insulin was constructed to see if the tyrosine side chain would mimic the effect of phenol binding in the hexamer and induce the R-state. In partial support of this hypothesis, the molecule crystallized as a half-helical hexamer (T(3)R(3)) in conditions that conventionally promote the fully nonhelical (T6) form. As expected, in the presence of phenol or resorcinol, the B5 Tyr hexamers adopt the fully helical (R6) conformation. Molecular modeling calculations were performed to investigate the conformational preference of the T-state B5 Tyr side chain in the T(3)R(3) form, this side chain being associated with structural perturbations of the A7-A10 loop in an adjacent hexamer. For an isolated dimer, several different orientations of the side chain were found, which were close in energy and readily interconvertible. In the crystal environment only one of these conformations remains low in energy; this conformation corresponds to that observed in the crystal structure. This suggests that packing constraints around residue B5 Tyr result in the observed structural rearrangements. Thus, rather than promoting the R-state in a manner analogous to phenol, the mutation appears to destabilize the T-state. These studies highlight the role of B5 His in determining hexamer conformation and in mediating crystal packing interactions, properties that are likely be important in vivo.
2540825	Residual structure in large fragments of staphylococcal nuclease: effects of amino acid substitutions.	In an attempt to develop a model of the denatured state of staphylococcal nuclease that can be analyzed experimentally under physiological conditions, a series of four large fragments of this small protein which extend from residues 1 to 103, 1 to 112, 1 to 128, and 1 to 136 have been generated through the overexpression of nuclease genes containing stop codons at defined positions. Large amounts of protein fragments were accumulated in induced cells and were purified by carrying out all fractionation steps in the presence of 6 M urea. The far-ultraviolet circular dichroism spectra of all four fragments suggested the presence of small to moderate amounts of residual structure. When the CD spectra were monitored as a function of concentrations of the tight-binding ligands Ca2+ and thymidine 3',5'-bisphosphate and the known affinity constants for wild-type nuclease (1-149) were used, apparent equilibrium constants of 160 and 2000 for the reversible denaturation reaction for fragments 1-136 and 1-128, respectively, were estimated. Four single and two double mutations, all of which exhibit unusual behavior in the full-length protein on solvent denaturation [Shortle, D., & Meeker, A. K. (1986) Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 1, 81-89] and thermal denaturation [Shortle, D., Meeker, A. K., & Freire, E. (1988) Biochemistry 27, 4761-4768], were recombined into the 1-136 and 1-128 fragment expression vectors, and purified mutant fragments were characterized.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
11738042	The 1.6 A crystal structure of E. coli argininosuccinate synthetase suggests a conformational change during catalysis.	BACKGROUND: Argininosuccinate synthetase (AS) is the rate-limiting enzyme of both the urea and arginine-citrulline cycles. In mammals, deficiency of AS leads to citrullinemia, a debilitating and often fatal autosomal recessive urea cycle disorder, whereas its overexpression for sustained nitric oxide production via the arginine-citrulline cycle leads to the potentially fatal hypotension associated with septic and cytokine-induced circulatory shock. RESULTS: The crystal structure of E. coli AS (EAS) has been determined by the use of selenomethionine incorporation and MAD phasing. The structure has been refined at 1.6 A resolution in the absence of its substrates and at 2.0 A in the presence of aspartate and citrulline (EAS*CIT+ASP). Each monomer of this tetrameric protein has two structural domains: a nucleotide binding domain similar to that of the "N-type" ATP pyrophosphatase class of enzymes, and a novel catalytic/multimerization domain. The EAS*CIT+ASP structure clearly describes the binding of citrulline at the cleft between the two domains and of aspartate to a loop of the nucleotide binding domain, whereas homology modeling with the N-type ATP pyrophosphatases has provided the location of ATP binding. CONCLUSIONS: The first three-dimensional structures of AS are reported. The fold of the nucleotide binding domain confirms AS as the fourth structurally defined member of the N-type ATP pyrophosphatases. The structures identify catalytically important residues and suggest the requirement for a conformational change during the catalytic cycle. Sequence similarity between the bacterial and human enzymes has been used for providing insight into the structural and functional effects of observed clinical mutations.
12820968	Structure of an mRNA capping enzyme bound to the phosphorylated carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II.	The 2.7 A structure of Candida albicans RNA guanylyltransferase Cgt1 cocrystallized with a carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) peptide composed of four Ser5-PO4 YSPTSPS heptad repeats illuminates distinct CTD-docking sites localized to the Cgt1 N-terminal nucleotidyl transferase domain. Tyr1, Pro3, Pro6, and Ser5-PO4 side chains from each of two YSPTSPS repeats contribute to the interface. Comparison to the Pin1-CTD structure shows that the CTD can assume markedly different conformations that are templated by particular binding partners. Structural plasticity combined with remodeling of CTD primary structure by kinases and phosphatases provides a versatile mechanism by which the CTD can recruit structurally dissimilar proteins during transcription. A binding site for the RNA triphosphatase component of the capping apparatus was also uncovered within the Cgt1 OB domain.
8144601	Binding of G protein beta gamma-subunits to pleckstrin homology domains.	Ligand-induced activation of many receptors leads to dissociation of the alpha- and beta gamma-subunit complexes of heterotrimeric G proteins, both of which regulate a variety of effector molecules involved in cellular signaling processes. In one case, a cytosolic enzyme, the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase (beta ARK) binds to the dissociated, prenylated, membrane-anchored beta gamma-subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins (G beta gamma) and is thereby targeted to its membrane-bound receptor substrate. Quite recently, numerous proteins involved in cellular signal transduction have been shown to contain sequences homologous with a "domain" originally identified in the protein "pleckstrin" (pleckstrin homology domain; PH domain) and subsequently found in the G beta gamma interaction region of the beta ARK sequence. Here we demonstrate that glutathione S-transferase-fusion proteins, containing sequences encompassing the PH domain of nine proteins from this group, bind G beta gamma to varying extents. Binding of G beta gamma to these fusion proteins was documented either by a direct binding assay or by ability to block G beta gamma-mediated membrane translocation of beta ARK1. G beta gamma binding to these fusion proteins was inhibited by the alpha subunit of Go (Go alpha), indicating that the binding of G beta gamma to G alpha and the PH domain-containing fusion proteins is mutually exclusive. Studies with a series of truncated PH domains derived from the Ras-guanine-nucleotide-releasing factor indicate that the G beta gamma binding domain includes only the C-terminal portion of the PH domain and sequences just distal to this. Protein-protein interactions between G beta gamma and PH domain-containing proteins may play a significant role in cellular signaling analogous to that previously demonstrated for Src homology 2 and 3 domains.
10493860	Engineered Bacillus lentus subtilisins having altered flexibility.	The three-dimensional structures of engineered variants of Bacillus lentus subtilisin having increased enzymatic activity, K27R/N87S/V104Y/N123S/T274A (RSYSA) and N76D/N87S/S103A/V104I (DSAI), were determined by X-ray crystallography. In addition to identifying changes in atomic position we report a method that identifies protein segments having altered flexibility. The method utilizes a statistical analysis of variance to delineate main-chain temperature factors that represent significant departures from the overall variance between equivalent regions seen throughout the structure. This method reveals changes in main-chain mobility in both variants. Residues 125-127 have increased mobility in the RSYSA variant while residues 100-104 have decreased mobility in the DSAI variant. These segments are located at the substrate-binding site and changes in their mobility are believed to relate to the observed changes in proteolytic activity. The effect of altered crystal lattice contacts on segment flexibility becomes apparent when identical variants, determined in two crystal forms, are compared with the native enzyme.
12484753	Local protein dynamics and catalysis: detection of segmental motion associated with rate-limiting product release by a glutathione transferase.	Glutathione transferase rGSTM1-1 catalyzes the addition of glutathione (GSH) to 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, a reaction in which the chemical step is 60-fold faster than the physical step of product release. The hydroxyl group of Y115, located in the active site access channel, controls the egress of product from the active site. The Y115F mutant enzyme has a k(cat) (72 s(-)(1)) that is 3.6-fold larger than that of the native enzyme (20 s(-)(1)). Crystallographic observations and evidence from amide proton exchange kinetics are consistent with localized increases in the degree of segmental motion of the Y115F mutant that are coupled to the enhanced rate of product release. The loss of hydrogen bonding interactions involving the hydroxyl group of Y115 is reflected in subtle alterations in the backbone position, an increase in B-factors for structural elements that comprise the channel to the active site, and, most dramatically, a loss of well-defined electron density near the site of mutation. The kinetics of amide proton exchange are also enhanced by a factor between 3 and 12 in these regions, providing direct, quantitative evidence for changes in local protein dynamics affecting product release. The enhanced product release rate is proposed to derive from a small shift in the equilibrium population of protein conformers that permit egress of the product from the active site.
9790663	Kinetic analysis and X-ray structure of haloalkane dehalogenase with a modified halide-binding site.	Haloalkane dehalogenase (DhlA) catalyzes the hydrolysis of haloalkanes via an alkyl-enzyme intermediate. Trp175 forms a halogen/halide-binding site in the active-site cavity together with Trp125. To get more insight in the role of Trp175 in DhlA, we mutated residue 175 and explored the kinetics and X-ray structure of the Trp175Tyr enzyme. The mutagenesis study indicated that an aromatic residue at position 175 is important for the catalytic performance of DhlA. Pre-steady-state kinetic analysis of Trp175Tyr-DhlA showed that the observed 6-fold increase of the Km for 1,2-dibromoethane (DBE) results from reduced rates of both DBE binding and cleavage of the carbon-bromine bond. Furthermore, the enzyme isomerization preceding bromide release became 4-fold faster in the mutant enzyme. As a result, the rate of hydrolysis of the alkyl-enzyme intermediate became the main determinant of the kcat for DBE, which was 2-fold higher than the wild-type kcat. The X-ray structure of the mutant enzyme at pH 6 showed that the backbone structure of the enzyme remains intact and that the tyrosine side chain lies in the same plane as Trp175 in the wild-type enzyme. The Clalpha-stabilizing aromatic rings of Tyr175 and Trp125 are 0.7 A further apart and due to the smaller size of the mutated residue, the volume of the cavity has increased by one-fifth. X-ray structures of mutant and wild-type enzyme at pH 5 demonstrated that the Tyr175 side chain rotated away upon binding of an acetic acid molecule, leaving one of its oxygen atoms hydrogen bonded to the indole nitrogen of Trp125 only. These structural changes indicate a weakened interaction between residue 175 and the halogen atom or halide ion in the active site and help to explain the kinetic changes induced by the Trp175Tyr mutation.
12093271	Role of His505 in the soluble fumarate reductase from Shewanella frigidimarina.	The X-ray structure of the soluble fumarate reductase from Shewanella frigidimarina [Taylor, P., Pealing, S. L., Reid, G. A., Chapman, S. K., and Walkinshaw, M. D. (1999) Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 1108-1112] clearly shows the presence of an internally bound sodium ion. This sodium ion is coordinated by one solvent water molecule (Wat912) and five backbone carbonyl oxygens from Thr506, Met507, Gly508, Glu534, and Thr536 in what is best described as octahedral geometry (despite the rather long distance from the sodium ion to the backbone oxygen of Met507 (3.1 A)). The water ligand (Wat912) is, in turn, hydrogen bonded to the imidazole ring of His505. This histidine residue is adjacent to His504, a key active-site residue thought to be responsible for the observed pK(a) of the enzyme. Thus, it is possible that His505 may be important in both maintaining the sodium site and in influencing the active site. Here we describe the crystallographic and kinetic characterization of the H505A and H505Y mutant forms of the Shewanella fumarate reductase. The crystal structures of both mutant forms of the enzyme have been solved to 1.8 and 2.0 A resolution, respectively. Both show the presence of the sodium ion in the equivalent position to that found in the wild-type enzyme. The structure of the H505A mutant shows the presence of two water molecules in place of the His505 side-chain which form part of a hydrogen-bonding network with Wat48, a ligand to the sodium ion. The structure of the H505Y mutant shows the hydroxyl group of the tyrosine side-chain hydrogen-bonding to a water molecule which is also a ligand to the sodium ion. Apart from these features, there are no significant structural alterations as a result of either substitution. Both the mutant enzymes are catalytically active but show markedly different pH profiles compared to the wild-type enzyme. At high pH (above 8.5), the wild type and mutant enzymes have very similar activities. However, at low pH (6.0), the H505A mutant enzyme is some 20-fold less active than wild-type. The combined crystallographic and kinetic results suggest that His505 is not essential for sodium binding but does affect catalytic activity perhaps by influencing the pK(a) of the adjacent His504.
9826509	Inactivity of N229A thymidylate synthase due to water-mediated effects: isolating a late stage in methyl transfer.	Mutation of thymidylate synthase N229(177) to alanine results in an essentially inactive enzyme, yet it leads to formation of a stable ternary complex. The kinetics of N229(177)A show that kcat for Escherichia coli is reduced by 200-fold while the Km for dUMP is increased 200-fold and the Km for folate increased by tenfold versus the wild-type enzyme. The crystal structures of N229(177)A in complex with dUMP and CB3717, and in complex with dUMP alone are determined at 2.4 A, and 2.5 A resolution. These structures identify the covalently bound ternary complex and show how N229(177)A traps an intermediate, and so becomes inactive in a later step of the reaction. Since the smaller alanine side-chain at N229(177)A does not directly sterically impair binding of ligands, the structures implicate, and place quantitative limits on the involvement of the structured water network in the active site of thymidylate synthase in both catalysis and in determining the binding affinity for dUMP (in contrast, the N229(177)V mutation in Lactobacillus casei has minimal effect on activity).
10347159	Identification of amino acid residues critical for aggregation of human CC chemokines macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha, MIP-1beta, and RANTES. Characterization of active disaggregated chemokine variants.	Human CC chemokines macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha, MIP-1beta, and RANTES (regulated on activation normal T cell expressed) self-associate to form high-molecular mass aggregates. To explore the biological significance of chemokine aggregation, nonaggregating variants were sought. The phenotypes of 105 hMIP-1alpha variants generated by systematic mutagenesis and expression in yeast were determined. hMIP-1alpha residues Asp26 and Glu66 were critical to the self-association process. Substitution at either residue resulted in the formation of essentially homogenous tetramers at 0.5 mg/ml. Substitution of identical or analogous residues in homologous positions in both hMIP-1beta and RANTES demonstrated that they were also critical to aggregation. Our analysis suggests that a single charged residue at either position 26 or 66 is insufficient to support extensive aggregation and that two charged residues must be present. Solution of the three-dimensional NMR structure of hMIP-1alpha has enabled comparison of these residues in hMIP-1beta and RANTES. Aggregated and disaggregated forms of hMIP-1alpha, hMIP-1beta, and RANTES generally have equivalent G-protein-coupled receptor-mediated biological potencies. We have therefore generated novel reagents to evaluate the role of hMIP-1alpha, hMIP-1beta, and RANTES aggregation in vitro and in vivo. The disaggregated chemokines retained their human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) inhibitory activities. Surprisingly, high concentrations of RANTES, but not disaggregated RANTES variants, enhanced infection of cells by both M- and T-tropic HIV isolates/strains. This observation has important implications for potential therapeutic uses of chemokines implying that disaggregated forms may be necessary for safe clinical investigation.
9988734	Identification of the calcium binding site and a novel ytterbium site in blood coagulation factor XIII by x-ray crystallography.	The presence or absence of calcium determines the activation, activity, oligomerization, and stability of blood coagulation factor XIII. To explore these observed effects, we have determined the x-ray crystal structure of recombinant factor XIII A2 in the presence of calcium, strontium, and ytterbium. The main calcium binding site within each monomer involves the main chain oxygen atom of Ala-457, and also the side chains from residues Asn-436, Asp-438, Glu-485, and Glu-490. Calcium and strontium bind in the same location, while ytterbium binds several angstroms removed. A novel ytterbium binding site is also found at the dimer two-fold axis, near residues Asp-270 and Glu-272, and this site may be related to the reported inhibition by lanthanide metals (Achyuthan, K. E., Mary, A., and Greenberg, C. S. (1989) Biochem. J. 257, 331-338). The overall structure of ion-bound factor XIII is very similar to the previously determined crystal structures of factor XIII zymogen, likely due to the constraints of this monoclinic crystal form. We have merged the three independent sets of water molecules in the structures to determine which water molecules are conserved and possibly structurally significant.
15213460	1H, 13C, and 15N resonance assignments of human Notch-1 calcium binding EGF domains 11-13.	null
10430876	Structural basis of the conversion of T4 lysozyme into a transglycosidase by reengineering the active site.	In contrast to hen egg-white lysozyme, which retains the beta-configuration of the substrate in the product, T4 lysozyme (T4L) is an inverting glycosidase. The substitution Thr-26 --> His, however, converts T4L from an inverting to a retaining enzyme. It is shown here that the Thr-26 --> His mutant is also a transglycosidase. Indeed, the transglycosylation reaction can be more effective than hydrolysis. In contrast, wild-type T4L has no detectable transglycosidase activity. The results support the prior hypothesis that catalysis by the Thr-26 --> His mutant proceeds via a covalent intermediate. Further mutations (Glu-11 --> His, Asp-20 --> Cys) of the T26H mutant lysozyme indicate that the catalytic mechanism of this mutant requires Glu-11 as a general acid but Asp-20 is not essential. The results help provide an overall rationalization for the activity of glycosidases, in which a highly conserved acid group (Glu-11 in T4L, Glu-35 in hen egg-white lysozyme) on the beta-side of the substrate acts as a proton donor, whereas alterations in the placement and chemical identity of residues on the alpha-side of the substrate can lead to catalysis with or without retention of the configuration, to transglycosidase activity, or to the formation of a stable enzyme-substrate adduct.
15835899	Crystallographic evidence for a new ensemble of ligand-induced allosteric transitions in hemoglobin: the T-to-T(high) quaternary transitions.	A detailed description of hemoglobin cooperativity requires knowledge of the dimer-dimer interactions responsible for the low ligand affinity of the quaternary-T tetramer, the "quaternary-T constraints", along with stereochemical pathways that specify how ligand binding disrupts these quaternary constraints. The recent mutagenic screen of Noble et al. [Noble, R. W., et al. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 12357-12368] has identified the major region of quaternary constraint to be a cluster of residues at the alpha1beta2 interface that is centered at Trp37beta. In this paper, crystallographic studies are presented for most of the mutant hemoglobins studied by Noble et al. These crystallographic experiments identify structural transitions-referred to as T-to-T(High) transitions-between the quaternary-T structure of wild-type deoxyhemoglobin and an ensemble of related T-like quaternary structures that are induced by some mutations in the Trp37beta cluster and/or by exposing crystals of wild-type or mutant deoxyhemoglobins to oxygen. The T-to-T(High) quaternary transitions consist of a rotation of the alpha1beta1 dimer relative to the alpha2beta2 dimer as well as a coupled alphabeta dimer bending component that consists of a small rotation of the alpha1 subunit relative to the beta1 subunit (and a symmetry related rotation of the alpha2 subunit relative to the beta2 subunit). In addition, differences in subunit tertiary structure associated with the T-to-T(High) transitions suggest two stereochemical pathways (one associated with the alpha subunits and one associated with the betasubunits) by which ligand binding specifically disrupts quaternary constraints in the Trp37beta cluster. In the alpha subunits, ligand binding induces a shift of the heme iron producing tension in a chain of covalent bonds that extends from the Fe-N(epsilon)(2)His(F8)alpha1 bond to the peptide backbone bonds of residues His87(F8)alpha1 and Ala88(F9)alpha1. This tension induces an alpha-to-pi transition in the COOH-terminal end of the F-helix that shifts the beta-carbon of Ala88alpha1 by approximately 1.5 A directly into the side chain of Tyr140alpha1 (a key residue in the Trp37beta2 cluster). Collectively these structural changes constitute a relatively short pathway by which ligand binding forces Tyr140alpha1 into the alpha1beta2 interface disrupting quaternary constraints associated with the Trp37beta2 cluster. In the beta subunits, our analysis suggests a more extended energy transduction pathway in which ligand-induced beta1-heme movement triggers tertiary changes in the beta1 subunit that promote alpha1beta1 dimer bending that disrupts quaternary constraints in the Trp37beta2 cluster at the alpha1beta2 interface.
9082984	Flexibility in DNA recombination: structure of the lambda integrase catalytic core.	Lambda integrase is archetypic of site-specific recombinases that catalyze intermolecular DNA rearrangements without energetic input. DNA cleavage, strand exchange, and religation steps are linked by a covalent phosphotyrosine intermediate in which Tyr342 is attached to the 3'-phosphate of the DNA cut site. The 1.9 angstrom crystal structure of the integrase catalytic domain reveals a protein fold that is conserved in organisms ranging from archaebacteria to yeast and that suggests a model for interaction with target DNA. The attacking Tyr342 nucleophile is located on a flexible loop about 20 angstroms from a basic groove that contains all the other catalytically essential residues. This bipartite active site can account for several apparently paradoxical features of integrase family recombinases, including the capacity for both cis and trans cleavage of DNA.
8172877	Engineering alternative beta-turn types in staphylococcal nuclease.	We have refined the crystal structures of three point mutants of staphylococcal nuclease designed to favor alternative beta-turn types. Single amino acid substitutions were made in a type VIa beta-turn (residues 115-118; Tyr-Lys-Pro-Asn) containing a cis Lys 116-Pro 117 peptide bond. The mutations result in two new backbone conformations, a type I beta-turn for P117T and a type I' beta-turn for P117G and P117A. The P117G and P117A structures exhibit a dramatic difference in backbone conformation in the region of the mutation compared to the nuclease A structure such that the side chain of Lys 116 is reoriented to point into the nucleotide binding pocket. The distinct conformation observed for the nuclease A, P117G, and P117T beta-turn sequences agrees with correlations between beta-turn type and sequence identified from protein crystal structures. The P117A turn conformation provides an exception to these correlations. The results demonstrate that single residue changes can significantly alter backbone conformation, illustrating the process by which diversity in the structure of the protein surface can evolve on a conserved structural core, and suggest protein engineering applications in which the positioning as well as the identify of side chains can be modified to design new enzyme functions. Nuclease variants at the type VIa beta-turn site also allow the relationship between the amino acid sequence and beta-turn conformation to be examined in the context of an identical protein fold in crystallographic detail.
8690718	Construction of a plasmid used for the expression of a sevenfold-mutant barley beta-amylase with increased thermostability in Escherichia coli and properties of the sevenfold-mutant beta-amylase.	To increase the thermostability of beta-amylase, seven kinds of single-mutant plasmids were constructed with an expression vector of barley beta-amylase by mutagenesis. The remaining activity versus temperature curves were used to determine the temperatures (T50) at which 50% of the initial activity was lost during a 30-min heating period. These mutations increased the T50 values by amounts ranging from 0.8 to 3.2 degrees C. To express the sevenfold-mutant beta-amylase in Escherichia coli, plasmid pB927 was constructed. E. coli harboring plasmid pB927 produced sevenfold-mutant beta- amylase. The T50 value of purified sevenfold-mutant beta-amylase (69.0 degrees C) was higher than that of not only the original recombinant beta-amylase (57.4 degrees C) by 11.6 degrees C but also soybean beta-amylase (63.2 degrees C) by 5.8 degrees C. The intragenic amino acid replacements were found to have simple additive effects on the thermostability of beta-amylase. The sevenfold-mutant beta-amylase was found to be stable at pHs up to 12.5, while the original recombinant beta-amylase was unstable at pHs above 9.5. The data obtained from kinetics studies suggested that the sevenfold-mutant beta-amylase acquired enhanced thermostability, but its function as a beta-amylase remained unchanged.
11243784	Transthyretin stability as a key factor in amyloidogenesis: X-ray analysis at atomic resolution.	Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis is a conformational disturbance, which, like other amyloidoses, represents a life threat. Here, we report a TTR variant, TTR Thr119Met, that has been shown to have a protective role in the development of clinical symptoms in carriers of TTR Val30Met, one of the most frequent variants among TTR amyloidosis patients. In order to understand this effect, we have determined the structures of the TTR Val30Met/Thr119Met double mutant isolated from the serum of one patient and of both the native and thyroxine complex of TTR Thr119Met. Major conclusions are: (i) new H-bonds within each monomer and monomer-monomer inter-subunit contacts, e.g. Ser117-Ser117 and Met119-Tyr114, increase protein stability, possibly leading to the protective effect of the TTR Val30Met/Thr119Met variant when compared to the single variant TTR Val30Met. (ii) The mutated residue (Met119) extends across the thyroxine binding channel inducing conformational changes that lead to closer contacts between different dimers within the tetramer. The data, at atomic resolution, were essential to detect, for the first time, the subtle changes in the inter-subunit contacts of TTR, and explain the non-amyloidogenic potential of the TTR Thr119Met variant, improving considerably current research on the TTR amyloid fibril formation pathway.
9761872	Crystallization and preliminary diffraction studies of pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase from Enterobacter cloacae PB2.	Pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) reductase of Enterobacter cloacae PB2, a flavoprotein involved in the biodegradation of the explosive PETN, ethylene glycol dinitrate (EGDN) and glycerol trinitrate (GTN), was purified from an overexpressing strain of E. coli and crystallized at 293 K using the sitting-drop vapour-diffusion method. Diffraction data can be seen at 1.8 A. The primitive orthorhombic cell has a monomer in the asymmetric unit. Preliminary molecular-replacement calculations have been performed using a search model based on Old Yellow enzyme.
12962482	Mechanisms of redox-coupled proton transfer in proteins: role of the proximal proline in reactions of the [3Fe-4S] cluster in Azotobacter vinelandii ferredoxin I.	The 7Fe ferredoxin from Azotobacter vinelandii (AvFdI) contains a [3Fe-4S](+/0) cluster that binds a single proton in its reduced level. Although the cluster is buried, and therefore inaccessible to solvent, proton transfer from solvent to the cluster is fast. The kinetics and energetics of the coupled electron-proton transfer reaction at the cluster have been analyzed in detail by protein-film voltammetry, to reveal that proton transfer is mediated by the mobile carboxylate of an adjacent surface residue, aspartate-15, the pK of which is sensitive to the charge on the cluster. This paper examines the role of a nearby proline residue, proline-50, in proton transfer and its coupling to electron transfer. In the P50A and P50G mutants, a water molecule has entered the cluster binding region; it is hydrogen bonded to the backbone amide of residue-50 and to the Asp-15 carboxylate, and it is approximately 4 A from the closest sulfur atom of the cluster. Despite the water molecule linking the cluster more directly to the solvent, proton transfer is not accelerated. A detailed analysis reveals that Asp-15 remains a central part of the mechanism. However, the electrostatic coupling between cluster and carboxylate is almost completely quenched, so that cluster reduction no longer induces such a favorable shift in the carboxylate pK, and protonation of the base no longer induces a significant shift in the pK of the cluster. The electrostatic coupling is crucial for maintaining the efficiency of proton transfer both to and from the cluster, over a range of pH values.
10198633	Structural basis for paramyxovirus-mediated membrane fusion.	Paramyxoviruses are responsible for significant human mortality and disease worldwide, but the molecular mechanisms underlying their entry into host cells remain poorly understood. We have solved the crystal structure of a fragment of the simian parainfluenza virus 5 fusion protein (SV5 F), revealing a 96 A long coiled coil surrounded by three antiparallel helices. This structure places the fusion and transmembrane anchor of SV5 F in close proximity with a large intervening domain at the opposite end of the coiled coil. Six amino acids, potentially part of the fusion peptide, form a segment of the central coiled coil, suggesting that this structure extends into the membrane. Deletion mutants of SV5 F indicate that putative flexible tethers between the coiled coil and the viral membrane are dispensable for fusion. The lack of flexible tethers may couple a final conformational change in the F protein directly to the fusion of two bilayers.
12006984	Structural basis for the selective activation of Rho GTPases by Dbl exchange factors.	Activation of Rho-family GTPases involves the removal of bound GDP and the subsequent loading of GTP, all catalyzed by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) of the Dbl-family. Despite high sequence conservation among Rho GTPases, Dbl proteins possess a wide spectrum of discriminatory potentials for Rho-family members. To rationalize this specificity, we have determined crystal structures of the conserved, catalytic fragments (Dbl and pleckstrin homology domains) of the exchange factors intersectin and Dbs in complex with their cognate GTPases, Cdc42 and RhoA, respectively. Structure-based mutagenesis of intersectin and Dbs reveals the key determinants responsible for promoting exchange activity in Cdc42, Rac1 and RhoA. These findings provide critical insight into the structural features necessary for the proper pairing of Dbl-exchange factors with Rho GTPases and now allow for the detailed manipulation of signaling pathways mediated by these oncoproteins in vivo.
11419952	Solution-state NMR investigations of triosephosphate isomerase active site loop motion: ligand release in relation to active site loop dynamics.	Product release is partially rate determining in the isomerization reaction catalyzed by Triosephosphate Isomerase, the conversion of dihydroxyacetone phosphate to D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, probably because an active-site loop movement is necessary to free the product from confinement in the active-site. The timescale of the catalytic loop motion and of ligand release were studied using 19F and 31P solution-state NMR. A 5'-fluorotryptophan was incorporated in the loop N-terminal hinge as a reporter of loop motion timescale. Crystallographic studies confirmed that the structure of the fluorinated enzyme is indistinguishable from the wild-type; the fluorine accepts a hydrogen bond from water and not from a protein residue, with minimal perturbation to the flexible loop stability. Two distinct loop conformations were observed by 19F NMR. Both for unligated (empty) and ligated enzyme samples a single species was detected, but the chemical shifts of these two distinct species differed by 1.2 ppm. For samples in the presence of subsaturating amounts of a substrate analogue, glycerol 3-phosphate, both NMR peaks were present, with broadened lineshapes at 0 degrees C. In contrast, a single NMR peak representing a rapid average of the two species was observed at 30 degrees C. We conclude that the rate of loop motion is less than 1400 s(-1) at 0 degrees C and more than 1400 s(-1) at 30 degrees C. Ligand release was studied under similar sample conditions, using 31P NMR of the phosphate group of the substrate analogue. The rate of ligand release is less than 1000 s(-1) at 0 degrees C and more than 1000 s(-1) at 30 degrees C. Therefore, loop motion and product release are probably concerted and likely to represent a rate limiting step for chemistry.
16472737	Structure of the catalytic and ubiquitin-associated domains of the protein kinase MARK/Par-1.	The Ser/Thr kinase MARK2 phosphorylates tau protein at sites that cause detachment from microtubules in Alzheimer neurofibrillary degeneration. Homologs of MARK2 include Par-1 in C. elegans and Drosophila, which generates embryonic polarity. We report the X-ray structure of the catalytic and ubiquitin-associated domains (UBA) of human MARK2. The activity was altered by mutations in the ATP binding site and/or activation loop. The catalytic domain shows the small and large lobes typical of kinases. The substrate cleft is in an inactive, open conformation in the inactivated and the wild-type structure. The UBA domain is attached via a taut linker to the large lobe of the kinase domain and leans against a hydrophobic patch on the small lobe. The UBA structure is unusual because the orientation of its third helix is inverted, relative to previous structures. Possible implications of the structure for the regulation of kinase activity are discussed.
15274923	Chromophore conformation and the evolution of tertiary structural changes in photoactive yellow protein.	We use time-resolved crystallography to observe the structural progression of a bacterial blue light photoreceptor throughout its photocycle. Data were collected from 10 ns to 100 ms after photoactivation of the E46Q mutant of photoactive yellow protein. Refinement of transient chromophore conformations shows that the spectroscopically distinct intermediates are formed via progressive disruption of the hydrogen bond network to the chromophore. Although structural change occurs within a few nanoseconds on and around the chromophore, it takes milliseconds for a distinct pattern of tertiary structural change to fully progress through the entire molecule, thus generating the putative signaling state. Remarkably, the coupling between the chromophore conformation and the tertiary structure of this small protein is not tight: there are leads and lags between changes in the conformation of the chromophore and the protein tertiary structure.
10556241	Roles of catalytic residues in alpha-amylases as evidenced by the structures of the product-complexed mutants of a maltotetraose-forming amylase.	The crystal structures of the four product-complexed single mutants of the catalytic residues of Pseudomonas stutzeri maltotetraose-forming alpha-amylase, E219G, D193N, D193G and D294N, have been determined. Possible roles of the catalytic residues Glu219, Asp193 and Asp294 have been discussed by comparing the structures among the previously determined complexed mutant E219Q and the present mutant enzymes. The results suggested that Asp193 predominantly works as the base catalyst (nucleophile), whose side chain atom lies in close proximity to the C1-atom of Glc4, being involved in the intermediate formation in the hydrolysis reaction. While Asp294 works for tightly binding the substrate to give a twisted and a deformed conformation of the glucose ring at position -1 (Glc4). The hydrogen bond between the side chain atom of Glu219 and the O1-atom of Glc4, that implies the possibility of interaction via hydrogen, consistently present throughout these analyses, supports the generally accepted role of this residue as the acid catalyst (proton donor).
15710600	Demonstration of isoleucine 199 as a structural determinant for the selective inhibition of human monoamine oxidase B by specific reversible inhibitors.	Several reversible inhibitors selective for human monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) that do not inhibit MAO A have been described in the literature. The following compounds: 8-(3-chlorostyryl)caffeine, 1,4-diphenyl-2-butene, and trans,trans-farnesol are shown to inhibit competitively human, horse, rat, and mouse MAO B with K(i) values in the low micromolar range but are without effect on either bovine or sheep MAO B or human MAO A. In contrast, the reversible competitive inhibitor isatin binds to all known MAO B and MAO A with similar affinities. Sequence alignments and the crystal structures of human MAO B in complex with 1,4-diphenyl-2-butene or with trans,trans-farnesol provide molecular insights into these specificities. These inhibitors span the substrate and entrance cavities with the side chain of Ile-199 rotated out of its normal conformation suggesting that Ile-199 is gating the substrate cavity. Ile-199 is conserved in all known MAO B sequences except bovine MAO B, which has Phe in this position (the sequence of sheep MAO B is unknown). Phe is conserved in the analogous position in MAO A sequences. The human MAO B I199F mutant protein of MAO B binds to isatin (K(i) = 3 microM) but not to the three inhibitors listed above. The crystal structure of this mutant demonstrates that the side chain of Phe-199 interferes with the binding of those compounds. This suggests that the Ile-199 "gate" is a determinant for the specificity of these MAO B inhibitors and provides a molecular basis for the development of MAO B-specific reversible inhibitors without interference with MAO A function in neurotransmitter metabolism.
10799511	Binding of the second generation non-nucleoside inhibitor S-1153 to HIV-1 reverse transcriptase involves extensive main chain hydrogen bonding.	S-1153 (AG1549) is perhaps the most promising non-nucleoside inhibitor of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase currently under development as a potential anti-AIDS drug, because it has a favorable profile of resilience to many drug resistance mutations. We have determined the crystal structure of S-1153 in a complex with HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. The complex possesses some novel features, including an extensive network of hydrogen bonds involving the main chain of residues 101, 103, and 236 of the p66 reverse transcriptase subunit. Such interactions are unlikely to be disrupted by side chain mutations. The reverse transcriptase/S-1153 complex suggests different ways in which resilience to mutations in the non-nucleoside inhibitors of reverse transcriptase binding site can be achieved.
2856083	The use of molecular-replacement phases for the refinement of the human rhinovirus 14 structure.	The structure of human rhinovirus 14 has been refined, by the method of restrained least squares, to an R factor of 0.16 for various random samples between 6 and 3 A resolution with F greater than 3 sigma (F). As a first step the non-crystallographic symmetry parameters were optimized using the initial atomic model in a rigid-body refinement procedure. Phase determination by the molecular-replacement phase extension and refinement procedure was continued to 2.94 A resolution, employing the improved non-crystallographic symmetry operators. The resultant structure-factor phases and weights, together with the measured amplitudes, constituted the X-ray observations used in the restrained refinement. The Hendrickson-Konnert program system [Konnert & Hendrickson (1980). Acta Cryst. A36, 344-350] was modified to incorporate non-crystallographic symmetry constrains and structure-factor phases as observations. The non-bonded contacts between subunits related by non-crystallographic symmetry were also restrained.
12693929	NMR structure of a bifunctional rhodamine labeled N-domain of troponin C complexed with the regulatory "switch" peptide from troponin I: implications for in situ fluorescence studies in muscle fibers.	The structure of the calcium-saturated regulatory domain of skeletal troponin C (sNTnC) complexed with the switch peptide comprising residues 115-131 of troponin I (TnI), and with a bifunctional rhodamine fluorescent label attached to residues 56 (E56C) and 63 (E63C) on the C helix of sNTnC, has been determined using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The structure shows that the integrity of the C helix is not altered by the E(56,63)C mutations or by the presence of the bifunctional rhodamine and that the label does not interact with the hydrophobic cleft of sNTnC. Moreover, the overall fold of the protein and the position of the TnI peptide are similar to those observed previously with related cardiac NTnC complexes with residues 147-163 of cardiac TnI [Li et al. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 8289-8298] and including the drug bepridil [Wang et al. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 31124-31133]. The degree of opening of the structure is reduced as compared to that of calcium-saturated sNTnC in the absence of the switch peptide [Gagni et al. (1995) Nat. Struct. Biol. 2, 784-789]. The switch peptide is bound in a shallow and complementary hydrophobic surface cleft largely defined by helices A and B and also has key ionic interactions with sNTnC. These results show that bifunctional rhodamine probes can be attached to surface helices via suitable pairs of solvent-accessible residues that have been mutated to cysteines, without altering the conformation of the labeled domain. A set of such probes can be used to determine the orientation and motion of the target domain in the cellular environment [Corrie et al. (1999) Nature 400, 425-430; Ferguson et al. (2003) Mol. Cell 11(4), in press].
12963380	Repacking the Core of T4 lysozyme by automated design.	Automated protein redesign, as implemented in the program ORBIT, was used to redesign the core of phage T4 lysozyme. A total of 26 buried or partially buried sites in the C-terminal domain were allowed to vary both their sequence and side-chain conformation while the backbone and non-selected side-chains remained fixed. A variant with seven substitutions ("Core-7") was identified as having the most favorable energy. The redesign experiment was repeated with a penalty for the presence of methionine residues. In this case the redesigned protein ("Core-10") had ten amino acid changes. The two designed proteins, as well as the constituent single mutants, and several single-site revertants were over-expressed in Escherichia coli, purified, and subjected to crystallographic and thermal analyses. The thermodynamic and structural data show that some repacking was achieved although neither redesigned protein was more stable than the wild-type protein. The use of the methionine penalty was shown to be effective. Several of the side-chain rotamers in the predicted structure of Core-10 differ from those observed. Rather than changing to new rotamers predicted by the design process, side-chains tend to maintain conformations similar to those seen in the native molecule. In contrast, parts of the backbone change by up to 2.8A relative to both the designed structure and wild-type.Water molecules that are present within the lysozyme molecule were removed during the design process. In the redesigned protein the resultant cavities were, to some degree, re-occupied by side-chain atoms. In the observed structure, however, water molecules were still bound at or near their original sites. This suggests that it may be preferable to leave such water molecules in place during the design procedure. The results emphasize the specificity of the packing that occurs within the core of a typical protein. While point substitutions within the core are tolerated they almost always result in a loss of stability. Likewise, combinations of substitutions may also be tolerated but usually destabilize the protein. Experience with T4 lysozyme suggests that a general core repacking methodology with retention or enhancement of stability may be difficult to achieve without provision for shifts in the backbone.
11453993	The contribution of metal ions to the conformational stability of ribonuclease T1: crystal versus solution.	In the crystalline state, ribonuclease T1 binds calcium ions at different lattice-dependent positions. In solution, its conformational stability is also remarkably increased in the presence of divalent metal ions. Combining urea unfolding studies and X-ray crystallography, we compared the presence of several metal ions at specific sites in the protein to their contribution to the overall stabilizing effect in solution. We constructed thermodynamic cycles involving particular metal ions and specific carboxylate functions. The resulting coupling energies indicate that some (but not all) metal ions found at lattice contacts in crystal structures may indeed significantly contribute to stability enhancement in the presence of metal ions in solution.
15698569	Assessment of the robustness of a serendipitous zinc binding fold: mutagenesis and protein grafting.	Zinc binding motifs have received much attention in the area of protein design. Here, we have tested the suitability of a recently discovered nonnative zinc binding structure as a protein design scaffold. A series of multiple alanine mutants was created to investigate the minimal requirements for folding, and solution structures of these mutants showed that the original fold was maintained, despite changes in approximately 50% of the sequence. We next attempted to transplant binding faces from chosen bimolecular interactions onto one of these mutants, and many of the resulting "chimeras" were shown to adopt a native-like fold. These results both highlight the robust nature of small zinc binding domains and underscore the complexity of designing functional proteins, even using such small, highly ordered scaffolds as templates.
15785764	Favorite flavors of surfaces.	null
9689112	3'-Azido-3'-deoxythymidine drug resistance mutations in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase can induce long range conformational changes.	HIV reverse transcriptase (RT) is one of the main targets for the action of anti-AIDS drugs. Many of these drugs [e.g., 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) and 2',3'-dideoxyinosine (ddI)] are analogues of the nucleoside substrates used by the HIV RT. One of the main problems in anti-HIV therapy is the selection of a mutant virus with reduced drug sensitivity. Drug resistance in HIV is generated for nucleoside analogue inhibitors by mutations in HIV RT. However, most of these mutations are situated some distance from the polymerase active site, giving rise to questions concerning the mechanism of resistance. To understand the possible structural bases for this, the crystal structures of AZT- and ddI-resistant RTs have been determined. For the ddI-resistant RT with a mutation at residue 74, no significant conformational changes were observed for the p66 subunit. In contrast, for the AZT-resistant RT (RTMC) bearing four mutations, two of these (at 215 and 219) give rise to a conformational change that propagates to the active site aspartate residues. Thus, these drug resistance mutations produce an effect at the RT polymerase site mediated simply by the protein. It is likely that such long-range effects could represent a common mechanism for generating drug resistance in other systems.
1422155	1H and 15N resonance assignments and secondary structure of the human thioredoxin C62A, C69A, C73A mutant.	The complete assignment of 1H and 15N backbone resonances and near-complete 1H side-chain resonance assignments have been obtained for the reduced form of a mutant of human thioredoxin (105 residues) in which the three non-active site cysteines have been substituted by alanines: C62A, C69A, C73A. The assignments were made primarily on the basis of three-dimensional 15N-separated nuclear Overhauser and Hartmann-Hahn spectroscopy, in conjunction with two-dimensional homonuclear and heteronuclear correlation experiments. Based on comparisons of short-range and interstrand nuclear Overhauser effects, patterns of amide exchange, and chemical-shift differences, the structure appears essentially unchanged from that of the previously determined solution structure of the native protein [Forman-Kay, J.D. et al. (1991) Biochemistry, 30, 2685-2698]. An assay for thioredoxin shows that the C62A, C69A, C73A mutant retains activity. The assignment of the spectrum for this mutant of human thioredoxin constitutes the basis for future studies aimed at comparing the details of the active-site conformation in the reduced and oxidized forms of the protein.
11937054	The structure and mechanism of the type II dehydroquinase from Streptomyces coelicolor.	The structure of the type II DHQase from Streptomyces coelicolor has been solved and refined to high resolution in complexes with a number of ligands, including dehydroshikimate and a rationally designed transition state analogue, 2,3-anhydro-quinic acid. These structures define the active site of the enzyme and the role of key amino acid residues and provide snap shots of the catalytic cycle. The resolution of the flexible lid domain (residues 21-31) shows that the invariant residues Arg23 and Tyr28 close over the active site cleft. The tyrosine acts as the base in the initial proton abstraction, and evidence is provided that the reaction proceeds via an enol intermediate. The active site of the structure of DHQase in complex with the transition state analog also includes molecules of tartrate and glycerol, which provide a basis for further inhibitor design.
11575933	Structural mechanisms of drug resistance for mutations at codons 181 and 188 in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and the improved resilience of second generation non-nucleoside inhibitors.	Mutations at either Tyr181 or Tyr188 within HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) give high level resistance to many first generation non-nucleoside inhibitors (NNRTIs) such as the anti-AIDS drug nevirapine. By comparison second generation inhibitors, for instance the drug efavirenz, show much greater resilience to these mutations. In order to understand the structural basis for these differences we have determined a series of seven crystal structures of mutant RTs in complexes with first and second generation NNRTIs as well as one example of an unliganded mutant RT. These are Tyr181Cys RT (TNK-651) to 2.4 A, Tyr181Cys RT (efavirenz) to 2.6 A, Tyr181Cys RT (nevirapine) to 3.0 A, Tyr181Cys RT (PETT-2) to 3.0 A, Tyr188Cys RT (nevirapine) to 2.6 A, Tyr188Cys RT (UC-781) to 2.6 A and Tyr188Cys RT (unliganded) to 2.8 A resolution. In the two previously published structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with mutations at 181 or 188 no side-chain electron density was observed within the p66 subunit (which contains the inhibitor binding pocket) for the mutated residues. In contrast the mutated side-chains can be seen in the NNRTI pocket for all seven structures reported here, eliminating the possibility that disordering contributes to the mechanism of resistance. In the case of the second generation compounds efavirenz with Tyr181Cys RT and UC-781 with Tyr188Cys RT there are only small rearrangements of either inhibitor within the binding site compared to wild-type RT and also for the first generation compounds TNK-651, PETT-2 and nevirapine with Tyr181Cys RT. For nevirapine with the Tyr188Cys RT there is however a more substantial movement of the drug molecule. We conclude that protein conformational changes and rearrangements of drug molecules within the mutated sites are not general features of these particular inhibitor/mutant combinations. The main contribution to drug resistance for Tyr181Cys and Tyr188Cys RT mutations is the loss of aromatic ring stacking interactions for first generation compounds, providing a simple explanation for the resilience of second generation NNRTIs, as such interactions make much less significant contribution to their binding.
11801599	Hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5A binds RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) NS5B and modulates RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity.	Hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5B is RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP), the essential catalytic enzyme for HCV replication. Recently, NS5A has been reported to be important for the establishment of HCV replication in vitro by the adaptive mutations, although its role in viral replication remains uncertain. Here we report that purified bacterial recombinant NS5A and NS5B directly interact with each other in vitro, detected by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assay. Furthermore, complex formation of these proteins transiently coexpressed in mammalian cells was detected by coprecipitation. Using terminally and internally truncated NS5A, two discontinuous regions of NS5A (amino acids 105-162 and 277-334) outside of the adaptive mutations were identified to be independently essential for the binding both in vivo and in vitro (Yamashita, T., Kaneko, S., Shirota, Y., Qin, W., Nomura, T., Kobayashi, K., and Mkyrakami, S. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 15479-15486). We previously examined the effect of His-NS5A on RdRP activity of the soluble recombinant NS5Bt in vitro (see Yamashita et al. above). Wild NS5A weakly stimulated at first (when less than 0.1 molar ratio to NS5B) and then inhibited the NS5Bt RdRP activity in a dose-dependent manner. The internal deletion mutants defective in NS5B binding exhibited no inhibitory effect, indicating that the NS5B binding is necessary for the inhibition. Taken together, our results support the idea that NS5A modulates HCV replication as a component of replication complex.
6088778	Virion orientation in cubic crystals of the human common cold virus HRV14.	A new cubic crystal form (a = 445.1 A) of space group P23 is reported for human rhinovirus R14. There are four particles per unit cell, each situated on a crystallographic 3-fold axis. The orientation of these particles has been determined with a rotation function and their approximate positions have been derived from a Patterson map. The crystals diffract to at least 2.8 A resolution. Limitations to the possible surface features of the virus are set by a comparison of the cubic and orthorhombic crystal forms.
15544809	Crystal structures of five bovine chymotrypsin complexes with P1 BPTI variants.	The bovine chymotrypsin-bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) interaction belongs to extensively studied models of protein-protein recognition. The accommodation of the inhibitor P1 residue in the S1 binding site of the enzyme forms the hot spot of this interaction. Mutations introduced at the P1 position of BPTI result in a more than five orders of magnitude difference of the association constant values with the protease. To elucidate the structural aspects of the discrimination between different P1 residues, crystal structures of five bovine chymotrypsin-P1 BPTI variant complexes have been determined at pH 7.8 to a resolution below 2 A. The set includes polar (Thr), ionizable (Glu, His), medium-sized aliphatic (Met) and large aromatic (Trp) P1 residues and complements our earlier studies of the interaction of different P1 side-chains with the S1 pocket of chymotrypsin. The structures have been compared to the complexes of proteases with similar and dissimilar P1 preferences, including Streptomyces griseus proteases B and E, human neutrophil elastase, crab collagenase, bovine trypsin and human thrombin. The S1 sites of these enzymes share a common general shape of significant rigidity. Large and branched P1 residues adapt in their complexes similar conformations regardless of the polarity and size differences between their S1 pockets. Conversely, long and flexible residues such as P1 Met are present in the disordered form and display a conformational diversity despite similar inhibitory properties with respect to most enzymes studied. Thus, the S1 specificity profiles of the serine proteases appear to result from the precise complementarity of the P1-S1 interface and minor conformational adjustments occurring upon the inhibitor binding.
11732897	A structural view of the action of Escherichia coli (lacZ) beta-galactosidase.	The structures of a series of complexes designed to mimic intermediates along the reaction coordinate for beta-galactosidase are presented. These complexes clarify and enhance previous proposals regarding the catalytic mechanism. The nucleophile, Glu537, is seen to covalently bind to the galactosyl moiety. Of the two potential acids, Mg(2+) and Glu461, the latter is in better position to directly assist in leaving group departure, suggesting that the metal ion acts in a secondary role. A sodium ion plays a part in substrate binding by directly ligating the galactosyl 6-hydroxyl. The proposed reaction coordinate involves the movement of the galactosyl moiety deep into the active site pocket. For those ligands that do bind deeply there is an associated conformational change in which residues within loop 794-804 move up to 10 A closer to the site of binding. In some cases this can be inhibited by the binding of additional ligands. The resulting restricted access to the intermediate helps to explain why allolactose, the natural inducer for the lac operon, is the preferred product of transglycosylation.
9446652	Antibodies from patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia/thrombosis recognize different epitopes on heparin: platelet factor 4.	Antibodies associated with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia/ thrombosis (HITT) are now thought to be specific for complexes formed between heparin and platelet factor 4 (PF4), a basic protein found normally in platelet alpha granules. How these antibodies cause thrombocytopenia and, in some patients, thrombosis, is not fully understood, in part because purified antibodies that could be labeled and used as probes to characterize target epitopes have not been available. We developed a novel method for antibody purification involving binding to and elution from PF4 complexed to heparin immobilized by end-linkage (EL) to a solid phase. Isolated antibodies were functional and after biotinylation, reacted with heparin: PF4 complexes in the same manner as unlabeled antibodies. Using these probes, we found that antibodies from 11 patients with HITT recognized two, and probably three, distinct sites on heparin: PF4 complexes. The antibodies did not bind to PF4 complexed with heparin immobilized by multiple chemical cross-linkages, suggesting that the heparin molecule must be in a flexible, relatively unconstrained state to react with PF4 in such a way as to create sites for HITT antibody binding.
4475115	Structure of the complex formed by bovine trypsin and bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. II. Crystallographic refinement at 1.9 A resolution.	null
16208361	Structure of the CED-4-CED-9 complex provides insights into programmed cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans.	Interplay among four genes--egl-1, ced-9, ced-4 and ced-3--controls the onset of programmed cell death in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Activation of the cell-killing protease CED-3 requires CED-4. However, CED-4 is constitutively inhibited by CED-9 until its release by EGL-1. Here we report the crystal structure of the CED-4-CED-9 complex at 2.6 A resolution, and a complete reconstitution of the CED-3 activation pathway using homogeneous proteins of CED-4, CED-9 and EGL-1. One molecule of CED-9 binds to an asymmetric dimer of CED-4, but specifically recognizes only one of the two CED-4 molecules. This specific interaction prevents CED-4 from activating CED-3. EGL-1 binding induces pronounced conformational changes in CED-9 that result in the dissociation of the CED-4 dimer from CED-9. The released CED-4 dimer further dimerizes to form a tetramer, which facilitates the autoactivation of CED-3. Together, our studies provide important insights into the regulation of cell death activation in C. elegans.
10677497	Determination of the binding sites of the proton transfer inhibitors Cd2+ and Zn2+ in bacterial reaction centers.	The reaction center (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides couples light-driven electron transfer to protonation of a bound quinone acceptor molecule, Q(B), within the RC. The binding of Cd(2+) or Zn(2+) has been previously shown to inhibit the rate of reduction and protonation of Q(B). We report here on the metal binding site, determined by x-ray diffraction at 2.5-A resolution, obtained from RC crystals that were soaked in the presence of the metal. The structures were refined to R factors of 23% and 24% for the Cd(2+) and Zn(2+) complexes, respectively. Both metals bind to the same location, coordinating to Asp-H124, His-H126, and His-H128. The rate of electron transfer from Q(A)(-) to Q(B) was measured in the Cd(2+)-soaked crystal and found to be the same as in solution in the presence of Cd(2+). In addition to the changes in the kinetics, a structural effect of Cd(2+) on Glu-H173 was observed. This residue was well resolved in the x-ray structure-i.e., ordered-with Cd(2+) bound to the RC, in contrast to its disordered state in the absence of Cd(2+), which suggests that the mobility of Glu-H173 plays an important role in the rate of reduction of Q(B). The position of the Cd(2+) and Zn(2+) localizes the proton entry into the RC near Asp-H124, His-H126, and His-H128. Based on the location of the metal, likely pathways of proton transfer from the aqueous surface to Q(B) are proposed.
14717710	Mutational and structural analysis of cobalt-containing nitrile hydratase on substrate and metal binding.	Mutants of a cobalt-containing nitrile hydratase (NHase, EC 4.2.1.84) from Pseudonocardia thermophila JCM 3095 involved in substrate binding, catalysis and formation of the active center were constructed, and their characteristics and crystal structures were investigated. As expected from the structure of the substrate binding pocket, the wild-type enzyme showed significantly lower K(m) and K(i) values for aromatic substrates and inhibitors, respectively, than aliphatic ones. In the crystal structure of a complex with an inhibitor (n-butyric acid) the hydroxyl group of betaTyr68 formed hydrogen bonds with both n-butyric acid and alphaSer112, which is located in the active center. The betaY68F mutant showed an elevated K(m) value and a significantly decreased k(cat) value. The apoenzyme, which contains no detectable cobalt atom, was prepared from Escherichia coli cells grown in medium without cobalt ions. It showed no detectable activity. A disulfide bond between alphaCys108 and alphaCys113 was formed in the apoenzyme structure. In the highly conserved sequence motif in the cysteine cluster region, two positions are exclusively conserved in cobalt-containing or iron-containing nitrile hydratases. Two mutants (alphaT109S and alphaY114T) were constructed, each residue being replaced with an iron-containing one. The alphaT109S mutant showed similar characteristics to the wild-type enzyme. However, the alphaY114T mutant showed a very low cobalt content and catalytic activity compared with the wild-type enzyme, and oxidative modifications of alphaCys111 and alphaCys113 residues were not observed. The alphaTyr114 residue may be involved in the interaction with the nitrile hydratase activator protein of P. thermophila.
8977129	Core mutants of the immunoglobulin binding domain of streptococcal protein G: stability and structural integrity.	A library of core mutants of the GB1 domain of streptococcal protein G was created, and the structure and stability of selected members was assessed by 1H-15N heteronuclear correlation NMR spectroscopy and fluorescence. All mutants comprised changes in beta-sheet residues, with sidechains at positions 5 (Leu), 7 (Leu), 52 (Phe) and 54 (Val) forming the beta-sheet side of the sheet-helix core interface. A solvent exposed position Ile-6 was chosen as a control. Randomization of bases at codon positions 1 and 3 with thymine at position 2 introduces five possible hydrophobic amino acids, namely Leu, Val, Ile, Phe, and Met. The distribution of encoded amino acids at all five positions is approximately as expected theoretically and indicates that no major bias was introduced towards particular residues. The overall structural integrity of several mutants, as assessed by NMR, ranges from very close to wild type to fully unfolded. Interestingly, the stability of the mutants is not strictly correlated with the number of changes or residue volume.
2994218	Three-dimensional structure of poliovirus at 2.9 A resolution.	The three-dimensional structure of poliovirus has been determined at 2.9 A resolution by x-ray crystallographic methods. Each of the three major capsid proteins (VP1, VP2, and VP3) contains a "core" consisting of an eight-stranded antiparallel beta barrel with two flanking helices. The arrangement of beta strands and helices is structurally similar and topologically identical to the folding pattern of the capsid proteins of several icosahedral plant viruses. In each of the major capsid proteins, the "connecting loops" and NH2- and COOH-terminal extensions are structurally dissimilar. The packing of the subunit "cores" to form the virion shell is reminiscent of the packing in the T = 3 plant viruses, but is significantly different in detail. Differences in the orientations of the subunits cause dissimilar contacts at protein-protein interfaces, and are also responsible for two major surface features of the poliovirion: prominent peaks at the fivefold and threefold axes of the particle. The positions and interactions of the NH2- and COOH-terminal strands of the capsid proteins have important implications for virion assembly. Several of the "connecting loops" and COOH-terminal strands form prominent radial projections which are the antigenic sites of the virion.
3972100	Essential structure for full enterotoxigenic activity of heat-stable enterotoxin produced by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.	Several analogues of heat-stable enterotoxins (STh and STp) produced by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli were synthesized. Peptides (STh[6-18] and STp[5-17]) consisting of 13 amino acid residues from the Cys residue near the N-terminus to the Cys residue near the C-terminus and linked by three disulfide bonds had the same biological and immunological properties as native STh and STp, respectively. The results indicated that the sequence with the 13 amino acid residues and three disulfide linkages is essential for full biological activity of ST.
8175707	Structural basis of the 70-kilodalton heat shock cognate protein ATP hydrolytic activity. II. Structure of the active site with ADP or ATP bound to wild type and mutant ATPase fragment.	The ATPase fragment of the bovine 70-kDa heat shock cognate protein is an attractive construct in which to study its mechanism of ATP hydrolysis. The three-dimensional structure suggests several residues that might participate in the ATPase reaction. Four acidic residues (Asp-10, Glu-175, Asp-199, and Asp-206) have been individually mutated to both the cognate amine (asparagine/glutamine) and to serine, and the effects of the mutations on the kinetics of the ATPase activity (Wilbanks, S. M., DeLuca-Flaherty, C., and McKay, D. B. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 12893-12898) and the structure of the mutant ATPase fragments have been determined, typically to approximately 2.4 A resolution. Additionally, the structures of the wild type protein complexed with MgADP and Pi, MgAMPPNP (5'-adenylyl-beta, gamma-imidodiphosphate) and CaAMPPNP have been refined to 2.1, 2.4, and 2.4 A, respectively. Combined, these structures provide models for the prehydrolysis, MgATP-bound state and the post-hydrolysis, MgADP-bound state of the ATPase fragment. These models suggest a pathway for the hydrolytic reaction in which 1) the gamma phosphate of bound ATP reorients to form a beta, gamma-bidentate phosphate complex with the Mg2+ ion, allowing 2) in-line nucleophilic attack on the gamma phosphate by a H2O molecule or OH- ion, with 3) subsequent release of inorganic phosphate.
10622255	Structure of a transiently phosphorylated switch in bacterial signal transduction.	Receiver domains are the dominant molecular switches in bacterial signalling. Although several structures of non-phosphorylated receiver domains have been reported, a detailed structural understanding of the activation arising from phosphorylation has been impeded by the very short half-lives of the aspartylphosphate linkages. Here we present the first structure of a receiver domain in its active state, the phosphorylated receiver domain of the bacterial enhancer-binding protein NtrC (nitrogen regulatory protein C). Nuclear magnetic resonance spectra were taken during steady-state autophosphorylation/dephosphorylation, and three-dimensional spectra from multiple samples were combined. Phosphorylation induces a large conformational change involving a displacement of beta-strands 4 and 5 and alpha-helices 3 and 4 away from the active site, a register shift and an axial rotation in helix 4. This creates an exposed hydrophobic surface that is likely to transmit the signal to the transcriptional activation domain.
8134350	Structure of the gene V protein of bacteriophage f1 determined by multiwavelength x-ray diffraction on the selenomethionyl protein.	The crystal structure of the dimeric gene V protein of bacteriophage f1 was determined using multiwavelength anomalous diffraction on the selenomethionine-containing wild-type and isoleucine-47-->methionine mutant proteins with x-ray diffraction data phased to 2.5 A resolution. The structure of the wild-type protein has been refined to an R factor of 19.2% using native data to 1.8 A resolution. The structure of the gene V protein was used to obtain a model for the protein portion of the gene V protein-single-stranded DNA complex.
9287153	Structure-function relationships in Anabaena ferredoxin: correlations between X-ray crystal structures, reduction potentials, and rate constants of electron transfer to ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase for site-specific ferredoxin mutants.	A combination of structural, thermodynamic, and transient kinetic data on wild-type and mutant Anabaena vegetative cell ferredoxins has been used to investigate the nature of the protein-protein interactions leading to electron transfer from reduced ferredoxin to oxidized ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase (FNR). We have determined the reduction potentials of wild-type vegetative ferredoxin, heterocyst ferredoxin, and 12 site-specific mutants at seven surface residues of vegetative ferredoxin, as well as the one- and two-electron reduction potentials of FNR, both alone and in complexes with wild-type and three mutant ferredoxins. X-ray crystallographic structure determinations have been carried out for six of the ferredoxin mutants. None of the mutants showed significant structural changes in the immediate vicinity of the [2Fe-2S] cluster, despite large decreases in electron-transfer reactivity (for E94K and S47A) and sizable increases in reduction potential (80 mV for E94K and 47 mV for S47A). Furthermore, the relatively small changes in Calpha backbone atom positions which were observed in these mutants do not correlate with the kinetic and thermodynamic properties. In sharp contrast to the S47A mutant, S47T retains electron-transfer activity, and its reduction potential is 100 mV more negative than that of the S47A mutant, implicating the importance of the hydrogen bond which exists between the side chain hydroxyl group of S47 and the side chain carboxyl oxygen of E94. Other ferredoxin mutations that alter both reduction potential and electron-transfer reactivity are E94Q, F65A, and F65I, whereas D62K, D68K, Q70K, E94D, and F65Y have reduction potentials and electron-transfer reactivity that are similar to those of wild-type ferredoxin. In electrostatic complexes with recombinant FNR, three of the kinetically impaired ferredoxin mutants, as did wild-type ferredoxin, induced large (approximately 40 mV) positive shifts in the reduction potential of the flavoprotein, thereby making electron transfer thermodynamically feasible. On the basis of these observations, we conclude that nonconservative mutations of three critical residues (S47, F65, and E94) on the surface of ferredoxin have large parallel effects on both the reduction potential and the electron-transfer reactivity of the [2Fe-2S] cluster and that the reduction potential changes are not the principal factor governing electron-transfer reactivity. Rather, the kinetic properties are most likely controlled by the specific orientations of the proteins within the transient electron-transfer complex.
11567087	Structural investigations of the active-site mutant Asn156Ala of outer membrane phospholipase A: function of the Asn-His interaction in the catalytic triad.	Outer membrane phospholipase A (OMPLA) from Escherichia coli is an integral-membrane enzyme with a unique His-Ser-Asn catalytic triad. In serine proteases and serine esterases usually an Asp occurs in the catalytic triad; its role has been the subject of much debate. Here the role of the uncharged asparagine in the active site of OMPLA is investigated by structural characterization of the Asn156Ala mutant. Asparagine 156 is not involved in maintaining the overall active-site configuration and does not contribute significantly to the thermal stability of OMPLA. The active-site histidine retains an active conformation in the mutant notwithstanding the loss of the hydrogen bond to the asparagine side chain. Instead, stabilization of the correct tautomeric form of the histidine can account for the observed decrease in activity of the Asn156Ala mutant.
12691748	Amino acid discrimination by a class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase specified by negative determinants.	The 2.5 A crystal structure of Escherichia coli glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase in a quaternary complex with tRNA(Gln), an ATP analog and glutamate reveals that the non-cognate amino acid adopts a distinct binding mode within the active site cleft. In contrast to the binding of cognate glutamine, one oxygen of the charged glutamate carboxylate group makes a direct ion-pair interaction with the strictly conserved Arg30 residue located in the first half of the dinucleotide fold domain. The nucleophilic alpha-carboxylate moiety of glutamate is mispositioned with respect to both the ATP alpha-phosphate and terminal tRNA ribose groups, suggesting that a component of amino acid discrimination resides at the catalytic step of the reaction. Further, the other side-chain carboxylate oxygen of glutamate is found in a position identical to that previously proposed to be occupied by the NH(2) group of the cognate glutamine substrate. At this position, the glutamate oxygen accepts hydrogen bonds from the hydroxyl moiety of Tyr211 and a water molecule. These findings demonstrate that amino acid specificity by GlnRS cannot arise from hydrogen bonds donated by the cognate glutamine amide to these same moieties, as previously suggested. Instead, Arg30 functions as a negative determinant to drive binding of non-cognate glutamate into a non-productive orientation. The poorly differentiated cognate amino acid-binding site in GlnRS may be a consequence of the late emergence of this enzyme from the eukaryotic lineage of glutamyl-tRNA synthetases.
11839309	The crystal structure of human tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase, Tdp1.	Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) catalyzes the hydrolysis of a phosphodiester bond between a tyrosine residue and a DNA 3' phosphate. The enzyme appears to be responsible for repairing the unique protein-DNA linkage that occurs when eukaryotic topoisomerase I becomes stalled on the DNA in the cell. The 1.69 A crystal structure reveals that human Tdp1 is a monomer composed of two similar domains that are related by a pseudo-2-fold axis of symmetry. Each domain contributes conserved histidine, lysine, and asparagine residues to form a single active site. The structure of Tdp1 confirms that the protein has many similarities to the members of the phospholipase D (PLD) superfamily and indicates a similar catalytic mechanism. The structure also suggests how the unusual protein-DNA substrate binds and provides insights about the nature of the substrate in vivo.
7619795	X-ray structures of the myosin motor domain of Dictyostelium discoideum complexed with MgADP.BeFx and MgADP.AlF4-.	The three-dimensional structures of the truncated myosin head from Dictyostelium discoideum myosin II complexed with beryllium and aluminum fluoride and magnesium ADP are reported at 2.0 and 2.6 A resolution, respectively. Crystals of the beryllium fluoride-MgADP complex belong to space group P2(1)2(1)2 with unit cell parameters of a = 105.3 A, b = 182.6 A, and c = 54.7 A, whereas the crystals of the aluminum fluoride complex belong to the orthorhombic space group C222(1) with unit cell dimensions of a = 87.9 A, b = 149.0 A, and c = 153.8 A. Chemical modification was not necessary to obtain these crystals. These structures reveal the location of the nucleotide complexes and define the amino acid residues that form the active site. The tertiary structure of the protein complexed with MgADP.BeFx is essentially identical to that observed previously in the three-dimensional model of chicken skeletal muscle myosin subfragment-1 in which no nucleotide was present. By contrast, the complex with MgADP.AlF4- exhibits significant domain movements. The structures suggest that the MgADP.BeFx complex mimics the ATP bound state and the MgADP.AlF4- complex is an analog of the transition state for hydrolysis. The domain movements observed in the MgADP.AlF4- complex indicate that myosin undergoes a conformational change during hydrolysis that is not associated with the nucleotide binding pocket but rather occurs in the COOH-terminal segment of the myosin motor domain.
11468392	Phase changes in T(3)R(3)(f) human insulin: temperature or pressure induced?	The structure of T(3)R(3) hexameric human insulin has been determined at 100 K from two different crystals at 1.2 and 1.3 A resolution and refined to residuals of 0.169 and 0.176, respectively. Owing to a phase change, the c axis is double its room-temperature value and the asymmetric unit contains two independent TR(f) insulin dimers. Compared with the orientation in the room-temperature structure, one dimer undergoes a rotation about the c axis of -5 degrees, while the second is rotated +4 degrees. A superposition of the backbone atoms of the two independent dimers shows that the C(alpha) atoms of five residues within the R(f)-state monomers are displaced by more than 1.0 A; smaller displacements are observed for the T-state monomers. Four zinc ions lie on the crystallographic threefold axis and each forms bonds to three symmetry-related HisB10 N(varepsilon2) atoms from the T- and R(f)-state trimers. While three of the zinc ions are tetrahedrally coordinated with a chloride ion completing the coordination sphere, mixed tetrahedral/octahedral coordination is observed for one of the T-state zinc ions. The three symmetry-related "phenolic binding sites" in one hexamer contain water molecules and a glycerol molecule, but the same sites in the second hexamer are occupied by a zinc ion coordinated to an alternate conformation of HisB10, a symmetry-related HisB5 and two chloride ions. Two additional and partially occupied zinc ion sites are observed at the interface between the two independent dimers. One zinc ion is coordinated by a T-state HisB5 of one dimer, an R-state HisB5 of the second dimer and two water molecules; the second zinc ion is coordinated by an alternate side-chain conformation of the T-state HisB5 and three water molecules. The carboxyl group of one GluB13 side chain, which exists in two discrete conformations, appears to be protonated, because short contacts exist to a second carboxyl group or to a carbonyl O atom.
10211818	Dissection of the structural and functional role of a conserved hydration site in RNase T1.	The reoccurrence of water molecules in crystal structures of RNase T1 was investigated. Five waters were found to be invariant in RNase T1 as well as in six other related fungal RNases. The structural, dynamical, and functional characteristics of one of these conserved hydration sites (WAT1) were analyzed by protein engineering, X-ray crystallography, and (17)O and 2H nuclear magnetic relaxation dispersion (NMRD). The position of WAT1 and its surrounding hydrogen bond network are unaffected by deletions of two neighboring side chains. In the mutant Thr93Gln, the Gln93N epsilon2 nitrogen replaces WAT1 and participates in a similar hydrogen bond network involving Cys6, Asn9, Asp76, and Thr91. The ability of WAT1 to form four hydrogen bonds may explain why evolution has preserved a water molecule, rather than a side-chain atom, at the center of this intricate hydrogen bond network. Comparison of the (17)O NMRD profiles from wild-type and Thr93Gln RNase T1 yield a mean residence time of 7 ns at 27 degrees C and an orientational order parameter of 0.45. The effects of mutations around WAT1 on the kinetic parameters of RNase T1 are small but significant and probably relate to the dynamics of the active site.
1560844	Fusarium solani cutinase is a lipolytic enzyme with a catalytic serine accessible to solvent.	Lipases belong to a class of esterases whose activity on triglycerides is greatly enhanced at lipid-water interfaces. This phenomenon, called interfacial activation, has a structural explanation: a hydrophobic lid, which at rest covers the catalytic site, is displaced on substrate or inhibitor binding and probably interacts with the lipid matrix. Fusarium solani pisi cutinase belongs to a group of homologous enzymes of relative molecular mass 22-25K (ref. 7) capable of degrading cutin, the insoluble lipid-polyester matrix covering the surface of plants, and hydrolysing triglycerides. Cutinases differ from classical lipases in that they do not exhibit interfacial activation; they are active on soluble as well as on emulsified triglycerides. Cutinases therefore establish a bridge between esterases and lipases. We report here the three-dimensional structure of a recombinant cutinase from F. solani pisi, expressed in Escherichia coli. Cutinase is an alpha-beta protein; the active site is composed of the triad Ser 120, His 188 and Asp 175. Unlike other lipases, the catalytic serine is not buried under surface loops, but is accessible to solvent. This could explain why cutinase does not display interfacial activation.
15084592	Crystal structure of transglutaminase 3 in complex with GMP: structural basis for nucleotide specificity.	Epidermal-type Transglutaminase 3 (TGase 3) is a Ca(2+)-dependent enzyme involved in the cross-linking of structural proteins required in the assembly of the cell envelope. We have recently shown that calcium-activated TGase 3, like TGase 2, can bind, hydrolyze, and is inhibited by GTP despite lacking structural homology with other GTP-binding proteins. Here we report the crystal structure determined at 2.0 A resolution of TGase 3 in complex with GMP to elucidate the structural features required for nucleotide recognition. Binding affinities for various nucleotides were found by fluorescence displacement to be as follows: guanosine 5'-3-O-(thio)triphosphate (GTPgammaS) (0.4 microm), GTP (0.6 microm), GDP (1.0 microm), GMP (0.4 microm), and ATP (28.0 microm). Furthermore, we found that GMP binds as a reversible, noncompetitive inhibitor of TGase 3 transamidation activity, similar to GTPgammaS and GDP. A genetic algorithm similarity program (GASP) approach (virtual ligand screening) identified three compounds from the Lead Quest trade mark data base (Tripos Inc.) based on superimposition of GTPgammaS, GDP, and GMP guanine nucleotides from our crystal structures to generate the minimum align flexible fragment. These three were nucleotide analogs without a phosphate group containing the minimal binding motif for TGase 3 that includes a nucleoside recognition groove. Binding affinities were measured as follows: TP349915 (K(d) = 4.1 microm), TP395289 (K(d) = 38.5 microm), TP394305 (K(d) = 1.0 mm). Remarkably, these compounds do not inhibit but instead activate TGase 3 transamidation by about 10-fold. These results suggest that the nucleotide binding pocket in TGase 3 may be exploited to either enhance or inhibit the enzymatic activity as required for different therapeutic approaches.
9253406	Three-dimensional structure of the Ras-interacting domain of RalGDS.	The Ras-interacting domains of the the protein-kinase Raf and the Ral guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator, RalGDS, lack extensive sequence similarity, but their overall three-dimensional structures are very similar to each other. Mutational analysis indicated that three residues in the RalGDS domain are critical for its interaction with Ras.
3018924	The site of attachment in human rhinovirus 14 for antiviral agents that inhibit uncoating.	WIN 51711 and WIN 52084 are structurally related, antiviral compounds that inhibit the replication of rhino (common cold) viruses and related picornaviruses. They prevent the pH-mediated uncoating of the viral RNA. The compounds consist of a 3-methylisoxazole group that inserts itself into the hydrophobic interior of the VP1 beta-barrel, a connecting seven-membered aliphatic chain, and a 4-oxazolinylphenoxy group (OP) that covers the entrance to an ion channel in the floor of the "canyon." Viral disassembly may be inhibited by preventing the collapse of the VP1 hydrophobic pocket or by blocking the flow of ions into the virus interior.
12578370	Dynamic roles of arginine residues 82 and 92 of Escherichia coli 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin pyrophosphokinase: crystallographic studies.	6-Hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin pyrophosphokinase (HPPK) catalyzes the pyrophosphoryl transfer from ATP to 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin (HP), the first reaction in the folate biosynthetic pathway. Arginine residues 82 and 92, strictly conserved in 35 HPPK sequences, play dynamic roles in the catalytic cycle of the enzyme. At 0.89-A resolution, two distinct conformations are observed for each of the two residues in the crystal structure of the wild-type HPPK in complex with two HP variants, two Mg(2+) ions, and an ATP analogue. Structural information suggests that R92 first binds to the alpha-phosphate group of ATP and then shifts to interact with the beta-phosphate as R82, which initially does not bind to ATP, moves in and binds to alpha-phosphate when the pyrophosphoryl transfer is about to occur. The dynamic roles of R82 and R92 are further elucidated by five more crystal structures of two mutant proteins, R82A and R92A, with and without bound ligands. Two oxidized forms of HP are observed with an occupancy ratio of 0.50:0.50 in the 0.89-A structure. The oxidation of HP has significant impact on its binding to the protein as well as the conformation of nearby residue W89.
3329733	Proteases of enhanced stability: characterization of a thermostable variant of subtilisin.	A procedure has been developed for the isolation and identification of mutants in the bacterial serine protease subtilisin that exhibit enhanced thermal stability. The cloned subtilisin BPN' gene from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens was treated with bisulfite, a chemical mutagen that deaminates cytosine to uracil in single-stranded DNA. Strains containing the cloned, mutagenized subtilisin gene which produced subtilisin with enhanced thermal stability were selected by a simple plate assay procedure which screens for esterase activity on nitrocellulose filters after preincubation at elevated temperatures. One thermostable subtilisin variant, designated 7150, has been fully characterized and found to differ from wild-type subtilisin by a single substitution of Ser for Asn at position 218. The 7150 enzyme was found to undergo thermal inactivation at one-fourth the rate of the wild-type enzyme when incubated at elevated temperatures. Moreover, the mid-point in the thermally induced transition from the folded to unfolded state was found to be 2.4-3.9 degrees C higher for 7150 as determined by differential scanning calorimetry under a variety of conditions. The refined, 1.8-A crystal structures of the wild-type and 7150 subtilisin have been compared in detail, leading to the conclusion that slight improvements in hydrogen bond parameters in the vicinity of position 218 result in the enhanced thermal stability of 7150.
7827089	Three-dimensional solution structure of the N-terminal receiver domain of NTRC.	NTRC is a transcriptional enhancer binding protein whose N-terminal domain is a member of the family of receiver domains of two-component regulatory systems. Using 3D and 4D NMR spectroscopy, we have completed the 1H, 15N, and 13C assignments and determined the solution structure of the N-terminal receiver domain of the NTRC protein. Determination of the three-dimensional structure was carried out with the program X-PLOR (Br|nger, 1992) using a total of 915 NMR-derived distance and dihedral angle restraints. The resultant family of structures has an average root mean square deviation of 0.81 A from the average structure for the backbone atoms involved in well-defined secondary structure. The structure is comprised of five alpha-helices and a five-stranded parallel beta-sheet, in a (beta/alpha)5 topology. Comparison of the solution structure of the NTRC receiver domain with the crystal structures of the homologous protein CheY in both the Mg(2+)-free and Mg(2+)-bound forms [Stock, A.M., Mottonen, J. M., Stock, J. B., & Schutt, C. E. (1989) Nature 337, 745-749; Volz, K., & Matsumura, P. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 296, 15511-15519; Stock, A. M., Martinez-Hackert, E., Rasmussen, B. F., West, A. H., Stock, J. B., Ringe, D., & Petsko, G. A. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 13375-13380; Bellsolell, L., Prieto, J., Serrano, L., & Coll, M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol. 238, 489-495] reveals a very similar fold, with the only significant difference occurring in the positioning of helix 4 relative to the rest of the protein. Examination of the conformation of consensus residues of the receiver domain superfamily [Volz, K. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 11741-11753] in the structures of the NTRC receiver domain and CheY establishes the structural importance of residues whose side chains are involved in hydrogen bonding or hydrophobic core interactions. The importance of some nonconsensus residues which may be conserved for their ability to fulfill helix capping roles is also discussed.
4628431	[Production of xylanase by Bacillus subtilis]	null
8289287	High-resolution crystallographic analysis of a co-operative dimeric hemoglobin.	High-resolution crystal structures of the co-operative dimeric hemoglobin from the blood clam Scapharca inaequivalvis have been determined in the unliganded (deoxy) and carbon monoxide (CO) liganded states. The deoxy structure has been refined at 1.6 A resolution to an R-factor of 0.158 and the CO structure has been refined at 1.4 A resolution to an R-factor of 0.159. These structures reveal details of the structural transitions involved in co-operative ligand binding that involve only a minor rotation of subunits but very striking tertiary changes at the interface. A small number of residues in the F-helix appear to mediate co-operativity in this simple hemoglobin. The oxygen affinity of each subunit appears to be largely dictated by the disposition of phenylalanine 97, whose side-chain packs in the heme pocket in the deoxy state but is extruded towards the interface in the CO-liganded structure. Direct involvement of the ligand-binding heme group is a novel feature of the subunit interface and appears important for intersubunit communication. Ligation alters the conformation of the heme propionate groups along with two interacting residues from the symmetry-related subunit. These two residues, lysine 96 and asparagine 100, link the heme of one subunit with the F-helix of the second subunit in such a way as to influence the ligand affinity of that subunit. The interface is highly hydrated by well-ordered water molecules that are likely to be important in the stabilization of the two structures.
9514755	Generation of ligand binding sites in T4 lysozyme by deficiency-creating substitutions.	Several variants of T4 lysozyme have been identified that sequester small organic ligands in cavities or clefts. To evaluate potential binding sites for non-polar molecules, we screened a number of hydrophobic large-to-small mutants for stabilization in the presence of benzene. In addition to Leu99-->Ala, binding was indicated for at least five other mutants. Variants Met102-->Ala and Leu133-->Gly, and a crevice mutant, Phe104-->Ala, were further characterized using X-ray crystallography and thermal denaturation. As predicted from the shape of the cavity in the benzene complex, mutant Leu133-->Gly also bound p-xylene. We attempted to enlarge the cavity of the Met102-->Ala mutant into a deep crevice through an additional substitution, but the double mutant failed to bind ligands because an adjacent helix rearranged into a non-helical structure, apparently due to the loss of packing interactions. In general, the protein structure contracted slightly to reduce the volume of the void created by truncating substitutions and expanded upon binding the non-polar ligand, with shifts similar to those resulting from the mutations.A polar molecule binding site was also created by truncating Arg95 to alanine. This creates a highly complementary buried polar environment that can be utilized as a specific "receptor" for a guanidinium ion. Our results suggest that creating a deficiency through truncating mutations of buried residues generates "binding potential" for ligands with characteristics similar to the deleted side-chain. Analysis of complex and apo crystal structures of binding and non-binding mutants suggests that ligand size and shape as well as protein flexibility and complementarity are all determinants of binding. Binding at non-polar sites is governed by hydrophobicity and steric interactions and is relatively permissive. Binding at a polar site is more restrictive and requires extensive complementarity between the ligand and the site.
15276844	X-ray and thermodynamic studies of staphylococcal nuclease variants I92E and I92K: insights into polarity of the protein interior.	We have used crystallography and thermodynamic analysis to study nuclease variants I92E and I92K, in which an ionizable side-chain is placed in the hydrophobic core of nuclease. We find that the energetic cost of burying ionizable groups is rather modest. The X-ray determinations show water molecules solvating the buried glutamic acid under cryo conditions, but not at room temperature. The lysine side-chain does not appear solvated in either case. Guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl) denaturation of I92E and I92K, done as a function of pH and monitored by tryptophan fluorescence, showed that I92E and I92K are folded in the pH range pH 3.5-9.0 and pH 5.5-9.5, respectively. The stability of the parental protein is independent of pH over a broad range. In contrast, the stabilities of I92E and I92K exhibit a pH dependence, which is quantitatively explained by thermodynamic analysis: the PK(a) value of the buried K92 is 5.6, while that of the buried E92 is 8.65. The free energy difference between burying the uncharged and charged forms of the groups is modest, about 6 kcal/mol. We also found that epsilon(app) for I92K and I92E is in the range approximately 10-12, instead of 2-4 commonly used to represent the protein interior. Side-chains 92E and 92K were uncharged under the conditions of the X-ray experiment. Both are buried completely inside the well-defined hydrophobic core of the variant proteins without forming salt-bridges or hydrogen bonds to other functional groups of the proteins. Under cryo conditions 92E shows a chain of four water molecules, which hydrate one oxygen atom of the carboxyl group of the glutamic acid. Two other water molecules, which are present in the wild-type at all temperatures, are also connected to the water ring observed inside the hydrophobic core. The ready burial of water with an uncharged E92 raises the possibility that solvent excursions into the interior also take place in the wild-type protein, but in a random, dynamic way not detectable by crystallography. Such transient excursions could increase the average polarity, and thus epsilon(app), of the protein interior.
7523679	Crystals of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase diffracting to 2.2 A resolution.	Reverse transcriptase (RT) from the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 has been crystallized in four closely related forms, the best of which diffract X-rays to 2.2 A resolution. The RT was crystallized as a complex with a non-nucleoside inhibitor, either nevirapine or a nevirapine analogue. Crystals grew from 6% PEG 3400 buffered at pH 5. These were of space group P2(1)2(1)2(1) with unit cell parameters a = 147 A, b = 112 A, c = 79 A (form A), with one RT heterodimer in the asymmetric unit. Changes in unit cell parameters and degree of crystalline order were observed on soaking pregrown crystals in various solutions, giving three further sets of unit cells. These were a = 143 A, b = 112, A, c = 79 A (form B), a = 141 A, b = 111 A, c = 73 A (form C), a = 143 A, b = 117 A, c = 66.5 A (form D). The last two forms diffract X-rays to 2.2 A resolution. Structure determinations of these latter crystal forms of RT should give a detailed atomic model for this therapeutically important drug target.
9587003	Crystal structure of a novel human peroxidase enzyme at 2.0 A resolution.	Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) has been implicated recently as an intracellular messenger that affects cellular processes including protein phosphorylation, transcription and apoptosis. A set of novel peroxidases, named peroxiredoxins (Prx), regulate the intracellular concentration of H2O2 by reducing it in the presence of an appropriate electron donor. The crystal structure of a human Prx enzyme, hORF6, reveals that the protein contains two discrete domains and forms a dimer. The N-terminal domain has a thioredoxin fold and the C-terminal domain is used for dimerization. The active site cysteine (Cys 47), which exists as cysteine-sulfenic acid in the crystal, is located at the bottom of a relatively narrow pocket. The positively charged environment surrounding Cys 47 accounts for the peroxidase activity of the enzyme, which contains no redox cofactors.
9799500	The hydroxyl of threonine 13 of the bovine 70-kDa heat shock cognate protein is essential for transducing the ATP-induced conformational change.	The mechanism by which ATP binding transduces a conformational change in 70-kDa heat shock proteins that results in release of bound peptides remains obscure. Wei and Hendershot demonstrated that mutating Thr37 of hamster BiP to glycine impeded the ATP-induced conformational change, as monitored by proteolysis [(1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 26670-26676]. We have mutated the equivalent resitude of the bovine heat shock cognate protein (Hsc70), Thr13, to serine, valine, and glycine. Solution small-angle X-ray scattering experiments on a 60-kDa fragment of Hsc70 show that ATP binding induces a conformational change in the T13S mutant but not the T13V or T13G mutants. The kinetics of ATP-induced tryptophan fluorescence intensity changes in the 60-kDa proteins is biphasic for the T13S mutant but monophasic for T13V or T13G, consistent with a conformational change following initial ATP binding in the T13S mutant but not the other two. Crystallographic structures of the ATPase fragments of the T13S and T13G mutants at 1.7 A resolution show that the mutations do not disrupt the ATP binding site and that the serine hydroxyl mimics the threonine hydroxyl in the wild-type structure. We conclude that the hydroxyl of Thr13 is essential for coupling ATP binding to a conformational change in Hsc70. Molecular modeling suggests this may result from the threonine hydroxyl hydrogen-bonding to a gamma-phosphate oxygen of ATP, thereby inducing a structural shift within the ATPase domain that couples to its interactions with the peptide binding domain.
12869558	Crystal structure of human butyrylcholinesterase and of its complexes with substrate and products.	Cholinesterases are among the most efficient enzymes known. They are divided into two groups: acetylcholinesterase, involved in the hydrolysis of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, and butyrylcholinesterase of unknown function. Several crystal structures of the former have shown that the active site is located at the bottom of a deep and narrow gorge, raising the question of how substrate and products enter and leave. Human butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) has attracted attention because it can hydrolyze toxic esters such as cocaine or scavenge organophosphorus pesticides and nerve agents. Here we report the crystal structures of several recombinant truncated human BChE complexes and conjugates and provide a description for mechanistically relevant non-productive substrate and product binding. As expected, the structure of BChE is similar to a previously published theoretical model of this enzyme and to the structure of Torpedo acetylcholinesterase. The main difference between the experimentally determined BChE structure and its model is found at the acyl binding pocket that is significantly bigger than expected. An electron density peak close to the catalytic Ser(198) has been modeled as bound butyrate.
7966307	Refined X-ray structure of Dictyostelium discoideum nucleoside diphosphate kinase at 1.8 A resolution.	The X-ray structure of the nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDP kinase) from Dictyostelium discoideum has been refined at 1.8 A resolution from a hexagonal crystal form with a 17 kDa monomer in its asymmetric unit. The atomic model was derived from the previously determined structure of a point mutant of the protein. It contains 150 amino acid residues out of 155, and 95 solvent molecules. The R-factor is 0.196 and the estimated accuracy of the average atomic position, 0.25 A. The Dictyostelium structure is described in detail and compared to those of Drosophila and Myxococcus xanthus NDP kinases. The protein is a hexamer with D3 symmetry. Residues 8 to 138 of each subunit form a globular alpha/beta domain. The four-stranded beta-sheet is antiparallel; its topology is different from other phosphate transfer enzymes, and also from the HPr protein which, like NDP kinase, carries a phosphorylated histidine. The same topology is nevertheless found in several other proteins that bind mononucleotides, RNA or DNA. Strand connections in NDP kinase involve alpha-helices and a 20-residue segment called the Kpn loop. The beta-sheet is regular except for a beta-bulge in edge strand beta 2 and a gamma-turn at residue Ile120 just preceding strand beta 4. The latter may induce strain in the main chain near the active site His122. The alpha 1 beta 2 motif participates in forming dimers within the hexamer, helices alpha 1 and alpha 3, the Kpn loop and C terminus, in forming trimers. The subunit fold and dimer interactions found in Dictyostelium are conserved in other NDP kinases. Trimer interactions probably occur in all eukaryotic enzymes. They are absent in the bacterial Myxococcus xanthus enzyme which is a tetramer, even though the subunit structure is very similar. In Dictyostelium, contacts between Kpn loops near the 3-fold axis block access to a central cavity lined with polar residues and filled with well-defined solvent molecules. Biochemical data on point mutants highlight the contribution of the Kpn loop to protein stability. In Myxococcus, the Kpn loops are on the tetramer surface and their sequence is poorly conserved. Yet, their conformation is maintained and they make a similar contribution to the substrate binding site.
10404591	Crystal structure of human bleomycin hydrolase, a self-compartmentalizing cysteine protease.	BACKGROUND: Bleomycin hydrolase (BH) is a cysteine protease that is found in all tissues in mammals as well as in many other eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Although its conserved cellular function is as yet unknown, human bleomycin hydrolase (hBH) has clinical significance in that it is thought to be the major cause of tumor cell resistance to bleomycin chemotherapy. In addition, it has been reported that an allelic variant of hBH is genetically linked to Alzheimer's disease. RESULTS: We have determined the crystal structures of wild-type hBH and of a mutant form of the enzyme. The overall structure is very similar to that of the previously determined yeast homolog, however, there is a striking difference in the charge distribution. The central channel, which has a strong positive electrostatic potential in the yeast protein, is slightly negative in hBH. We have determined that hBH does not have the DNA-binding activity of the yeast protein and that the enzyme is localized to the cytoplasm. CONCLUSIONS: The difference in charge distribution between the yeast and human BH enzymes is most likely responsible for the difference in DNA-binding activity. Nevertheless, the C-terminal autoprocessing activity and the role of the C terminus as a determinant for peptidase activity are conserved between the yeast and human forms. The structure of hBH suggests that the putative Alzheimer's disease linked variation does not directly alter the intrinsic peptidase activity. Rather, the position of the mutation suggests that it could affect interactions with another protein, which may modulate peptidase activity through repositioning of the C terminus.
6372857	Critical role of the A2 amino acid residue in the biological activity of insulin: [2-glycine-A]- and [2-alanine-A]insulins.	We report the synthesis of [2-glycine-A]insulin ([ Gly2 -A]insulin) and [2-alanine-A]insulin ([ Ala2-A]insulin) in which the indicated amino acid has been substituted for isoleucine found in this position in the natural hormone. The circular dichroic (CD) spectra of the analogues were obtained, and their properties were examined in several biological assays. CD studies suggested that the analogues remain monomeric at concentrations at which insulin is partly or mostly dimeric. Both analogues are extremely weak full agonists. [ Gly2 -A]-insulin displays 0.05% of the potency of bovine insulin, whereas [Ala2-A]insulin assays at 0.4% of the activity of the natural hormone. We conclude that the presence of the side chain of isoleucine at position A2 is a critical requirement for high biological activity in insulin. The data, together with previous observations, are discussed in connection with an interaction between the side chain of isoleucine-A2 and the phenolic ring system of tyrosine-A19, which are in van der Waals contact in crystalline insulin. This interaction may be required to permit the molecule to assume a conformation consistent with dimerization and with binding to the insulin receptor.
9930994	Effects of the E177K mutation in D-amino acid transaminase. Studies on an essential coenzyme anchoring group that contributes to stereochemical fidelity.	D-Amino acid transaminase is a bacterial enzyme that uses pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) as a cofactor to catalyze the conversion of D-amino acids into their corresponding alpha-keto acids. This enzyme has already been established as a target for novel antibacterial agents through suicide inactivation by a number of compounds. To improve their potency and specificity, the detailed enzyme mechanism, especially the role of its PLP cofactor, is under investigation. Many PLP-dependent transaminases have a negatively charged amino acid residue forming a salt-bridge with the pyridine nitrogen of its cofactor that promotes its protonation to stabilize the formation of a ketimine intermediate, which is subsequently hydrolyzed in the normal transaminase reaction pathway. However, alanine racemase has a positively charged arginine held rigidly in place by an extensive hydrogen bond network that may destabilize the ketimine intermediate, and make it too short-lived for a transaminase type of hydrolysis to occur. To test this hypothesis, we changed Glu-177 into a titratable, positively charged lysine (E177K). The crystal structure of this mutant shows that the positive charge of the newly introduced lysine side chain points away from the nitrogen of the cofactor, which may be due to electrostatic repulsions not being overcome by a hydrogen bond network such as found in alanine racemase. This mutation makes the active site more accessible, as exemplified by both biochemical and crystallographic data: CD measurements indicated a change in the microenvironment of the protein, some SH groups become more easily titratable, and at pH 9.0 the PMP peak appeared around 315 nm rather than at 330 nm. The ability of this mutant to convert L-alanine into D-alanine increased about 10-fold compared to wild-type and to about the same extent as found with other active site mutants. On the other hand, the specific activity of the E177K mutant decreased more than 1000-fold compared to wild-type. Furthermore, titration with L-alanine resulted in the appearance of an enzyme-substrate quinonoid intermediate absorbing around 500 nm, which is not observed with usual substrates or with the wild-type enzyme in the presence of L-alanine. The results overall indicate the importance of charged amino acid side chains relative to the coenzyme to maintain high catalytic efficiency.
9641984	Multiple open forms of ribose-binding protein trace the path of its conformational change.	Conformational changes are necessary for the function of bacterial periplasmic receptors in chemotaxis and transport. Such changes allow entry and exit of ligand, and enable the correct interaction of the ligand-bound proteins with the membrane components of each system. Three open, ligand-free forms of the Escherichia coli ribose-binding protein were observed here by X-ray crystallographic studies. They are opened by 43 degrees, 50 degrees and 64 degrees with respect to the ligand-bound protein reported previously. The three open forms are not distinct, but show a clear relationship to each other. All are the product of a similar opening motion, and are stabilized by a new, almost identical packing interface between the domains. The changes are generated by similar bond rotations, although some differences in the three hinge segments are needed to accommodate the various structural scenarios. Some local repacking also occurs as interdomain contacts are lost. The least open (43 degrees) form is probably the dominant one in solution under normal conditions, although a mixture of species seems likely. The open and closed forms have distinct surfaces in the regions known to be important in chemotaxis and transport, which will differentiate their interactions with the membrane components. It seems certain that the conformational path that links the forms described here is that followed during ligand retrieval, and in ligand release into the membrane-bound permease system.
15369336	Enhanced degradation of chemical warfare agents through molecular engineering of the phosphotriesterase active site.	null
14508061	A model for the reaction mechanism of the transglutaminase 3 enzyme.	Transglutaminase enzymes (TGases) catalyze the calcium dependent formation of an isopeptide bond between protein-bound glutamine and lysine substrates. Previously we have shown that activated TGase 3 acquires two additional calcium ions at site two and three. The calcium ion at site three results in the opening of a channel. At this site, the channel opening and closing could modulate, depending on which metal is bound. Here we propose that the front of the channel could be used by the two substrates for enzyme reaction. We propose that the glutamine substrate is directed from Trp236 into the enzyme, shown by molecular docking. Then a lysine substrate approaches the opened active site to engage Trp327, leading to formation of the isopeptide bond. Further, direct comparisons of the structures of TGase 3 with other TGases have allowed us to identify several residues that might potentially be involved in generic and specific recognition of the glutamine and lysine substrates.
10310546	Five years of ACCESS: what have we learned?	null
11210138	Analysis of catalytic residues of Thermoactinomyces vulgaris R-47 alpha-amylase II (TVA II) by site-directed mutagenesis.	To confirm that the catalytic residues (Asp325, Glu354, and Asp421) are necessary for the hydrolysis of starch, pullulan, and cyclodextrins, we constructed TVA II mutated by site-directed mutagenesis. The mutated enzymes (D325N, E354Q, and D421N) had markedly reduced levels of activity, less than 0.006% of the wild type, indicating that these three residues are the catalytic sites for these substrates. Even E354D had reduced levels of activity, less than 0.05% of wild type. These four mutated enzymes retained a trace of activity. From the result of hydrolysis patterns for maltohexaose, in particular, D421N, unlike D325N and E354Q, catalyzed transglycosylation rather than hydrolysis. The results suggest that Asp421 could function to capture water molecules.
16185060	Crystal structure of Thermobifida fusca endoglucanase Cel6A in complex with substrate and inhibitor: the role of tyrosine Y73 in substrate ring distortion.	Endoglucanase Cel6A from Thermobifida fusca hydrolyzes the beta-1,4 linkages in cellulose at accessible points along the polymer. The structure of the catalytic domain of Cel6A from T. fusca in complex with a nonhydrolysable substrate analogue that acts as an inhibitor, methylcellobiosyl-4-thio-beta-cellobioside (Glc(2)-S-Glc(2)), has been determined to 1.5 A resolution. The glycosyl unit in subsite -1 was sterically hindered by Tyr73 and forced into a distorted (2)S(o) conformation. In the enzyme where Tyr73 was mutated to a serine residue, the hindrance was removed and the glycosyl unit in subsite -1 had a relaxed (4)C(1) chair conformation. The relaxed conformation was seen in two complex structures of the mutated enzyme, with cellotetrose (Glc(4)) at 1.64 A and Glc(2)-S-Glc(2) at 1.04 A resolution.
7583653	Structure-based design of a lysozyme with altered catalytic activity.	Here we show that the substitution Thr 26-->His in the active site of T4 lysozyme causes the product to change from the alpha- to the beta-anomer. This implies an alteration in the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme. From the change in product, together with inspection of relevant crystal structures, it is inferred that wild-type T4 lysozyme is an anomer-inverting enzyme with a single displacement mechanism in which water attacks from the alpha-side of the substrate. In contrast, the mutant T26H is an anomer-retaining enzyme with an apparently double displacement mechanism in which a water molecule attacks from the opposite side of the substrate. The results also show that the mechanism of wild-type T4 lysozyme differs from that of hen egg-white lysozyme even though both enzymes are presumed to have evolved from a common precursor.
15981999	Structural consequences of the inhibitor-resistant Ser130Gly substitution in TEM beta-lactamase.	Beta-lactamase confers resistance to penicillin-like antibiotics by hydrolyzing their beta-lactam bond. To combat these enzymes, inhibitors covalently cross-linking the hydrolytic Ser70 to Ser130 were introduced. In turn, mutant beta-lactamases have emerged with decreased susceptibility to these mechanism-based inhibitors. Substituting Ser130 with glycine in the inhibitor-resistant TEM (IRT) mutant TEM-76 (S130G) prevents the irreversible cross-linking step. Since the completely conserved Ser130 is thought to transfer a proton important for catalysis, its substitution might be hypothesized to result in a nonfunctional enzyme; this is clearly not the case. To investigate how TEM-76 remains active, its structure was determined by X-ray crystallography to 1.40 A resolution. A new water molecule (Wat1023) is observed in the active site, with two configurations located 1.1 and 1.3 A from the missing Ser130 Ogamma; this water molecule likely replaces the Ser130 side-chain hydroxyl in substrate hydrolysis. Intriguingly, this same water molecule is seen in the IRT TEM-32 (M69I/M182T), where Ser130 has moved significantly. TEM-76 shares other structural similarities with various IRTs; like TEM-30 (R244S) and TEM-84 (N276D), the water molecule activating clavulanate for cross-linking (Wat1614) is disordered (in TEM-30 it is actually absent). As expected, TEM-76 has decreased kinetic activity, likely due to the replacement of the Ser130 side-chain hydroxyl with a water molecule. In contrast to the recently determined structure of the S130G mutant in the related SHV-1 beta-lactamase, in TEM-76 the key hydrolytic water (Wat1561) is still present. The conservation of similar accommodations among IRT mutants suggests that resistance arises from common mechanisms, despite the disparate locations of the various substitutions.
10842338	NMR investigations of protein-carbohydrate interactions: studies on the relevance of Trp/Tyr variations in lectin binding sites as deduced from titration microcalorimetry and NMR studies on hevein domains. Determination of the NMR structure of the complex between pseudohevein and N,N',N"-triacetylchitotriose.	Model studies on lectins and their interactions with carbohydrate ligands in solution are essential to gain insights into the driving forces for complex formation and to optimize programs for computer simulations. The specific interaction of pseudohevein with N,N', N"-triacetylchitotriose has been analyzed by (1)H-NMR spectroscopy. Because of its small size, with a chain length of 45 amino acids, this lectin is a prime target to solution-structure determination by NOESY NMR experiments in water. The NMR-analysis was extended to assessment of the topology of the complex between pseudohevein and N, N',N"-triacetylchitotriose. NOESY experiments in water solution provided 342 protein proton-proton distance constraints. Binding of the ligand did not affect the pattern of the protein nuclear Overhauser effect signal noticeably, what would otherwise be indicative of a ligand-induced conformational change. The average backbone (residues 3-41) RMSD of the 20 refined structures was 1.14 A, whereas the heavy atom RMSD was 2.18 A. Two different orientations of the trisaccharide within the pseudohevein binding site are suggested, furnishing an explanation in structural terms for the lectin's capacity to target chitin. In both cases, hydrogen bonds and van der Waals contacts confer stability to the complexes. This conclusion is corroborated by the thermodynamic parameters of binding determined by NMR and isothermal titration calorimetry. The association process was enthalpically driven. In relation to hevein, the Trp/Tyr-substitution in the binding pocket has only a small effect on the free energy of binding in contrast to engineered galectin-1 and a mammalian C-type lectin. A comparison of the three-dimensional structure of pseudohevein in solution to those reported for wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) in the solid state and for hevein and WGA-B in solution has been performed, providing a data source about structural variability of the hevein domains. The experimentally derived structures and the values of the solvent accessibilities for several key residues have also been compared with conformations obtained by molecular dynamics simulations, pointing to the necessity to further refine the programs to enhance their predictive reliability and, thus, underscoring the importance of this kind of combined analysis in model systems.
15163634	Mutant huntingtin directly increases susceptibility of mitochondria to the calcium-induced permeability transition and cytochrome c release.	Huntington's disease (HD) is initiated by an abnormally expanded polyglutamine stretch in the huntingtin protein, conferring a novel property on the protein that leads to the loss of striatal neurons. Defects in mitochondrial function have been implicated in the pathogenesis of HD. Here, we have examined the hypothesis that the mutant huntingtin protein may directly interact with the mitochondrion and affect its function. In human neuroblastoma cells and clonal striatal cells established from HdhQ7 (wild-type) and HdhQ111 (mutant) homozygote mouse knock-in embryos, huntingtin was present in a purified mitochondrial fraction. Subfractionation of the mitochondria and limited trypsin digestion of the organelle demonstrated that huntingtin was associated with the outer mitochondrial membrane. We further demonstrated that a recombinant truncated mutant huntingtin protein, but not a wild-type, directly induced mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) pore opening in isolated mouse liver mitochondria, an effect that was prevented completely by cyclosporin A (CSA) and ATP. Importantly, the mutant huntingtin protein significantly decreased the Ca2+ threshold necessary to trigger MPT pore opening. We found a similar increased susceptibility to the calcium-induced MPT in liver mitochondria isolated from a knock-in HD mouse model. The mutant huntingtin protein-induced MPT pore opening was accompanied by a significant release of cytochrome c, an effect completely inhibited by CSA. These findings suggest that the development of specific MPT inhibitors may be an interesting therapeutic avenue to delay the onset of HD.
11602602	Structural basis for Ni(2+) transport and assembly of the urease active site by the metallochaperone UreE from Bacillus pasteurii.	Bacillus pasteurii UreE (BpUreE) is a putative chaperone assisting the insertion of Ni(2+) ions in the active site of urease. The x-ray structure of the protein has been determined for two crystal forms, at 1.7 and 1.85 A resolution, using SIRAS phases derived from a Hg(2+)-derivative. BpUreE is composed of distinct N- and C-terminal domains, connected by a short flexible linker. The structure reveals the topology of an elongated homodimer, formed by interaction of the two C-terminal domains through hydrophobic interactions. A single Zn(2+) ion bound to four conserved His-100 residues, one from each monomer, connects two dimers resulting in a tetrameric BpUreE known to be formed in concentrated solutions. The Zn(2+) ion can be replaced by Ni(2+) as shown by anomalous difference maps obtained on a crystal of BpUreE soaked in a solution containing NiCl(2). A large hydrophobic patch surrounding the metal ion site is surface-exposed in the biologically relevant dimer. The BpUreE structure represents the first for this class of proteins and suggests a possible role for UreE in the urease nickel-center assembly.
7473737	Mutations at positions 153 and 328 in Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase provide insight towards the structure and function of mammalian and yeast alkaline phosphatases.	In order to understand some of the differences between human placental, human, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatases in specific activity, activation by magnesium, and pH versus activity profiles, the X-ray crystal structures of three mutant E. coli alkaline phosphatases have been determined. The aligned sequences of alkaline phosphatases from mammalian, yeast and E. coli show that 25 to 30% of the amino acids are absolutely conserved and the active site residues are completely conserved with the exception of residues 153, 328 and 155. The bacterial enzyme has a salt-bridge, Asp153/Lys328, near the third metal binding site which, based on sequence homology, is apparently absent in the yeast and mammalian enzymes. The human enzymes have histidine at positions 153 and 328, and the yeast enzyme has histidine at position 328. In the E. coli enzyme, Asp153 was replaced by histidine (D153H), Lys328 was replaced by histidine (K328H), and a double mutant (DM) was constructed containing both mutations. The structure of the K328H enzyme was refined using cross-validation to a resolution of 2.3 A with a working R-factor of 0.181 and a free R-factor of 0.249. The DM structure was determined to a resolution of 2.5 A with a working R-factor of 0.166 and a free R-factor of 0.233. The structure of the D135H enzyme, which has been reported to a resolution of 2.4 A, has been re-refined using cross-validation to a working R-factor of 0.179 and a free R-factor of 0.239 for controlled comparisons with the two new structures. In all three structures the most significant changes are related to the bound phosphate inhibitor and the identity of the metal ion in the third binding site. The changes in the position of the phosphate group and the alterations at the third metal binding site indicate the structural basis for the variations in the steady-state kinetic parameters previously reported for these enzymes.
12893935	Structure and mechanism of the lactose permease of Escherichia coli.	Membrane transport proteins that transduce free energy stored in electrochemical ion gradients into a concentration gradient are a major class of membrane proteins. We report the crystal structure at 3.5 angstroms of the Escherichia coli lactose permease, an intensively studied member of the major facilitator superfamily of transporters. The molecule is composed of N- and C-terminal domains, each with six transmembrane helices, symmetrically positioned within the permease. A large internal hydrophilic cavity open to the cytoplasmic side represents the inward-facing conformation of the transporter. The structure with a bound lactose homolog, beta-D-galactopyranosyl-1-thio-beta-D-galactopyranoside, reveals the sugar-binding site in the cavity, and residues that play major roles in substrate recognition and proton translocation are identified. We propose a possible mechanism for lactose/proton symport (co-transport) consistent with both the structure and a large body of experimental data.
1948029	X-ray structure of the GCN4 leucine zipper, a two-stranded, parallel coiled coil.	The x-ray crystal structure of a peptide corresponding to the leucine zipper of the yeast transcriptional activator GCN4 has been determined at 1.8 angstrom resolution. The peptide forms a parallel, two-stranded coiled coil of alpha helices packed as in the "knobs-into-holes" model proposed by Crick in 1953. Contacts between the helices include ion pairs and an extensive hydrophobic interface that contains a distinctive hydrogen bond. The conserved leucines, like the residues in the alternate hydrophobic repeat, make side-to-side interactions (as in a handshake) in every other layer of the dimer interface. The crystal structure of the GCN4 leucine zipper suggests a key role for the leucine repeat, but also shows how other features of the coiled coil contribute to dimer formation.
10884355	Host range and variability of calcium binding by surface loops in the capsids of canine and feline parvoviruses.	Canine parvovirus (CPV) emerged in 1978 as a host range variant of feline panleukopenia virus (FPV). This change of host was mediated by the mutation of five residues on the surface of the capsid. CPV and FPV enter cells by endocytosis and can be taken up by many non-permissive cell lines, showing that their host range and tissue specificity are largely determined by events occurring after cell entry.We have determined the structures of a variety of strains of CPV and FPV at various pH values and in the presence or absence of Ca(2+). The largest structural difference was found to occur in a flexible surface loop, consisting of residues 359 to 375 of the capsid protein. This loop binds a divalent calcium ion in FPV and is adjacent to a double Ca(2+)-binding site, both in CPV and FPV. Residues within the loop and those associated with the double Ca(2+)-binding site were found to be essential for virus infectivity. The residues involved in the double Ca(2+)-binding site are conserved only in FPV and CPV.Our results show that the loop conformation and the associated Ca(2+)-binding are influenced by the Ca(2+) concentration, as well as pH. These changes are correlated with the ability of the virus to hemagglutinate erythrocytes. The co-localization of hemagglutinating activity and host range determinants on the virus surface implies that these properties may be functionally linked. We speculate that the flexible loop and surrounding regions are involved in binding an as yet unidentified host molecule and that this interaction influences host range.
2269428	Lethal and temperature-sensitive mutations and their suppressors identify an essential structural element in U2 small nuclear RNA.	U2 snRNA is an essential component of the splicing apparatus in eukaryotic cells. Three possible secondary structures for the highly conserved 5' half of U2 snRNA are consistent with U2 phylogenetic sequence variation. To distinguish among these models and to test the function of U2 structural elements, we made greater than 35 mutations in the yeast U2 snRNA gene. Some of the mutations were designed in pairs so that combinations could be made that would restore base-pairing to differentiate helix requirements from primary sequence requirements. The mutations identify an essential stem-and-loop structure adjacent to the branchpoint interaction region. A conserved complementarity to the loop just upstream of the Sm site and an additional conserved stem-loop are dispensable for U2 function, even in the background of a previously identified large internal deletion. Non-Watson-Crick base appositions at the 53-62 base pair in the essential stem lead to a variety of temperature and KCl-sensitive phenotypes, as well as an accumulation of unspliced precursors in vivo. Chemical structure probing of U2 RNA in vivo reveals that the bulk of U2 in a yeast cell adopts a structure in good agreement with that deduced from genetic results. We suggest that this stem-loop is not a binding site for an intrinsic U2 snRNP protein but may interact with other factors during spliceosome assembly or splicing.
9300481	Crystal structures of bovine chymotrypsin and trypsin complexed to the inhibitor domain of Alzheimer's amyloid beta-protein precursor (APPI) and basic pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI): engineering of inhibitors with altered specificities.	The crystal structures of the inhibitor domain of Alzheimer's amyloid beta-protein precursor (APPI) complexed to bovine chymotrypsin (C-APPI) and trypsin (T-APPI) and basic pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) bound to chymotrypsin (C-BPTI) have been solved and analyzed at 2.1 A, 1.8 A, and 2.6 A resolution, respectively. APPI and BPTI belong to the Kunitz family of inhibitors, which is characterized by a distinctive tertiary fold with three conserved disulfide bonds. At the specificity-determining site of these inhibitors (P1), residue 15(I)4 is an arginine in APPI and a lysine in BPTI, residue types that are counter to the chymotryptic hydrophobic specificity. In the chymotrypsin complexes, the Arg and Lys P1 side chains of the inhibitors adopt conformations that bend away from the bottom of the binding pocket to interact productively with elements of the binding pocket other than those observed for specificity-matched P1 side chains. The stereochemistry of the nucleophilic hydroxyl of Ser 195 in chymotrypsin relative to the scissile P1 bond of the inhibitors is identical to that observed for these groups in the trypsin-APPI complex, where Arg 15(I) is an optimal side chain for tryptic specificity. To further evaluate the diversity of sequences that can be accommodated by one of these inhibitors, APPI, we used phage display to randomly mutate residues 11, 13, 15, 17, and 19, which are major binding determinants. Inhibitors variants were selected that bound to either trypsin or chymotrypsin. As expected, trypsin specificity was principally directed by having a basic side chain at P1 (position 15); however, the P1 residues that were selected for chymotrypsin binding were His and Asn, rather than the expected large hydrophobic types. This can be rationalized by modeling these hydrophilic side chains to have similar H-bonding interactions to those observed in the structures of the described complexes. The specificity, or lack thereof, for the other individual subsites is discussed in the context of the "allowed" residues determined from a phage display mutagenesis selection experiment.
9692985	Structural role of the 30's loop in determining the ligand specificity of the human immunodeficiency virus protease.	The structural basis of ligand specificity in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) protease has been investigated by determining the crystal structures of three chimeric HIV proteases complexed with SB203386, a tripeptide analogue inhibitor. The chimeras are constructed by substituting amino acid residues in the HIV type 1 (HIV-1) protease sequence with the corresponding residues from HIV type 2 (HIV-2) in the region spanning residues 31-37 and in the active site cavity. SB203386 is a potent inhibitor of HIV-1 protease (Ki = 18 nM) but has a decreased affinity for HIV-2 protease (Ki = 1280 nM). Crystallographic analysis reveals that substitution of residues 31-37 (30's loop) with those of HIV-2 protease renders the chimera similar to HIV-2 protease in both the inhibitor binding affinity and mode of binding (two inhibitor molecules per protease dimer). However, further substitution of active site residues 47 and 82 has a compensatory effect which restores the HIV-1-like inhibitor binding mode (one inhibitor molecule in the center of the protease active site) and partially restores the affinity. Comparison of the three chimeric protease structures with those of HIV-1 and SIV proteases complexed with the same inhibitor reveals structural changes in the flap regions and the 80's loops, as well as changes in the dimensions of the active site cavity. The study provides structural evidence of the role of the 30's loop in conferring inhibitor specificity in HIV proteases.
9697776	Structure of the metal-ion-activated diphtheria toxin repressor/tox operator complex.	The virulent phenotype of the pathogenic bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae is conferred by diphtheria toxin, whose expression is an adaptive response to low concentrations of iron. The expression of the toxin gene (tox) is regulated by the repressor DtxR, which is activated by transition metal ions. X-ray crystal structures of DtxR with and without (apo-form) its coordinated transition metal ion have established the general architecture of the repressor, identified the location of the metal-binding sites, and revealed a metal-ion-triggered subunit-subunit 'caliper-like' conformational change. Here we report the three-dimensional crystal structure of the complex between a biologically active Ni(II)-bound DtxR(C102D) mutant, in which a cysteine is replaced by an aspartate at residue 102, and a 33-base-pair DNA segment containing the toxin operator toxO. This structure shows that DNA interacts with two dimeric repressor proteins bound to opposite sides of the tox operator. We propose that a metal-ion-induced helix-to-coil structural transition in the amino-terminal region of the protein is partly responsible for the unique mode of repressor activation by transition metal ions.
7540935	Mechanism of inhibition of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase by non-nucleoside inhibitors.	The structure of unliganded HIV-1 reverse transcriptase has been determined at 2.35 A resolution and refined to an R-factor of 0.219 (for all data) with good stereochemistry. The unliganded structure was produced by soaking out a weak binding non-nucleoside inhibitor, HEPT, from pregrown crystals. Comparison with the structures of four different RT and non-nucleoside inhibitor complexes reveals that only minor domain rearrangements occur, but there is a significant repositioning of a three-stranded beta-sheet in the p66 subunit (containing the catalytic aspartic acid residues 110, 185 and 186) with respect to the rest of the polymerase site. This suggests that NNIs inhibit RT by locking the polymerase active site in an inactive conformation, reminiscent of the conformation observed in the inactive p51 subunit.
2269354	Engineering of microheterogeneity-resistant p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens.	By site-directed mutagenesis, Cys-116 was converted to Ser-116 in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (EC 1.14.13.2) from Pseudomonas fluorescens. In contrast to wild-type enzyme, the C116S mutant is no longer susceptible to oxidation by hydrogen peroxide and shows no reactivity towards 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoate). Crystals of the C116S mutant are isomorphous with the crystal form of wild-type enzyme. A difference electron density confirms the mutation made.
10346917	Mechanistic implications from crystalline complexes of wild-type and mutant adenylosuccinate synthetases from Escherichia coli.	Asp13 and His41 are essential residues of adenylosuccinate synthetase, putatively catalyzing the formation of adenylosuccinate from an intermediate of 6-phosphoryl-IMP. Wild-type adenylosuccinate synthetase and three mutant synthetases (Arg143 --> Leu, Lys16 --> Gln, and Arg303 --> Leu) from Eschericha coli have been crystallized in the presence of IMP, hadacidin (an analogue of L-aspartate), Mg2+, and GTP. The active site of each complex contains 6-phosphoryl-IMP, Mg2+, GDP, and hadacidin, except for the Arg303 --> Leu mutant, which does not bind hadacidin. In response to the formation of 6-phosphoryl-IMP, Asp13 enters the inner coordination sphere of the active site Mg2+. His41 hydrogen bonds with 6-phosphoryl-IMP, except in the Arg303 --> Leu complex, where it remains bound to the guanine nucleotide. Hence, recognition of the active site Mg2+ by Asp13 evidently occurs after the formation of 6-phosphoryl-IMP, but recognition of the intermediate by His41 may require the association of L-aspartate with the active site. Structures reported here support a mechanism in which Asp13 and His41 act as the catalytic base and acid, respectively, in the formation of 6-phosphoryl-IMP, and then act together as catalytic acids in the subsequent formation of adenylosuccinate.
1552945	A human recombinant haemoglobin designed for use as a blood substitute.	The need to develop a blood substitute is now urgent because of the increasing concern over blood-transmitted viral and bacterial pathogens. Cell-free haemoglobin solutions and human haemoglobin synthesized in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae have been investigated as potential oxygen-carrying substitutes for red blood cells. But these haemoglobins cannot be used as a blood substitute because (1) the oxygen affinity in the absence of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate is too high to allow unloading of enough oxygen in the tissues, and (2) they dissociate into alpha beta dimers that are cleared rapidly by renal filtration, which can result in long-term kidney damage. We have produced a human haemoglobin using an expression vector containing one gene encoding a mutant beta-globin with decreased oxygen affinity and one duplicated, tandemly fused alpha-globin gene. Fusion of the two alpha-globin subunits increases the half-life of this haemoglobin molecule in vivo by preventing its dissociation into alpha beta dimers and therefore also eliminates renal toxicity.
16366586	Structure and function of GDP-mannose-3',5'-epimerase: an enzyme which performs three chemical reactions at the same active site.	GDP-mannose-3',5'-epimerase (GME) from Arabidopsis thaliana catalyzes the epimerization of both the 3' and 5' positions of GDP-alpha-D-mannose to yield GDP-beta-L-galactose. Production of the C5' epimer of GDP-alpha-D-mannose, GDP-beta-L-gulose, has also been reported. The reaction occurs as part of vitamin C biosynthesis in plants. We have determined structures of complexes of GME with GDP-alpha-D-mannose, GDP-beta-L-galactose, and a mixture of GDP-beta-L-gulose with GDP-beta-L-4-keto-gulose to resolutions varying from 2.0 to 1.4 A. The enzyme has the classical extended short-chain dehydratase/reductase (SDR) fold. We have confirmed that GME establishes an equilibrium between two products, GDP-beta-L-galactose and GDP-beta-L-gulose. The reaction proceeds by C4' oxidation of GDP-alpha-D-mannose followed by epimerization of the C5' position to give GDP-beta-L-4-keto-gulose. This intermediate is either reduced to give GDP-beta-L-gulose or the C3' position is epimerized to give GDP-beta-L-4-keto-galactose, then C4' is reduced to GDP-beta-L-galactose. The combination of oxidation, epimerization, and reduction in a single active site is unusual. Structural analysis coupled to site-directed mutagenesis suggests C145 and K217 as the acid/base pair responsible for both epimerizations. On the basis of the structure of the GDP-beta-L-gulose/GDP-beta-L-4-keto-gulose co-complex, we predict that a ring flip occurs during the first epimerization and that a boat intermediate is likely for the second epimerization. Comparison of GME with other SDR enzymes known to abstract a protein alpha to the keto function of a carbohydrate identifies key common features.
9628477	Structural basis for the interaction of Ras with RalGDS.	The Ras protein signals to a number of distinct pathways by interacting with diverse downstream effectors. Among the effectors of Ras are the Raf kinase and RalGDS, a guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator specific for Ral. Despite the absence of significant sequence similarities, both effectors bind directly to Ras, but with different specificities. We report here the 2.1 A crystal structure of the complex between Ras and the Ras-interacting domain (RID) of RalGDS. This structure reveals that the beta-sheet of the RID joins the switch I region of Ras to form an extended beta-sheet with a topology similar to that found in the Rap-Raf complex. However, the side chain interactions at the joining junctions of the two interacting systems and the relative orientation of the two binding domains are distinctly different. Furthermore, in the case of the Ras-RID complex a second RID molecule also interacts with a different part of the Ras molecule, the switch II region. These findings account for the cross-talk between the Ras and Ral pathways and the specificity with which Ras distinguishes the two effectors.
11513589	Structural characterization of the enzyme-substrate, enzyme-intermediate, and enzyme-product complexes of thiamin phosphate synthase.	Thiamin phosphate synthase catalyzes the formation of thiamin phosphate from 4-amino-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyrimidine pyrophosphate and 5-(hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole phosphate. Several lines of evidence suggest that the reaction proceeds via a dissociative mechanism. The previously determined crystal structure of thiamin phosphate synthase in complex with the reaction products, thiamin phosphate and magnesium pyrophosphate, provided a view of the active site and suggested a number of additional experiments. We report here seven new crystal structures primarily involving crystals of S130A thiamin phosphate synthase soaked in solutions containing substrates or products. We prepared S130A thiamin phosphate synthase with the intent of characterizing the enzyme-substrate complex. Surprisingly, in three thiamin phosphate synthase structures, the active site density cannot be modeled as either substrates or products. For these structures, the best fit to the electron density is provided by a model that consists of independent pyrimidine, pyrophosphate, and thiazole phosphate fragments, consistent with a carbenium ion intermediate. The resulting carbenium ion is likely to be further stabilized by proton transfer from the pyrimidine amino group to the pyrophosphate to give the pyrimidine iminemethide, which we believe is the species that is observed in the crystal structures.
15691839	The crystal structures of EAP domains from Staphylococcus aureus reveal an unexpected homology to bacterial superantigens.	The Eap (extracellular adherence protein) of Staphylococcus aureus functions as a secreted virulence factor by mediating interactions between the bacterial cell surface and several extracellular host proteins. Eap proteins from different Staphylococcal strains consist of four to six tandem repeats of a structurally uncharacterized domain (EAP domain). We have determined the three-dimensional structures of three different EAP domains to 1.8, 2.2, and 1.35 A resolution, respectively. These structures reveal a core fold that is comprised of an alpha-helix lying diagonally across a five-stranded, mixed beta-sheet. Comparison of EAP domains with known structures reveals an unexpected homology with the C-terminal domain of bacterial superantigens. Examination of the structure of the superantigen SEC2 bound to the beta-chain of a T-cell receptor suggests a possible ligand-binding site within the EAP domain (Fields, B. A., Malchiodi, E. L., Li, H., Ysern, X., Stauffacher, C. V., Schlievert, P. M., Karjalainen, K., and Mariuzza, R. (1996) Nature 384, 188-192). These results provide the first structural characterization of EAP domains, relate EAP domains to a large class of bacterial toxins, and will guide the design of future experiments to analyze EAP domain structure/function relationships.
10557269	Structure of the HIV-1 integrase catalytic domain complexed with an inhibitor: a platform for antiviral drug design.	HIV integrase, the enzyme that inserts the viral DNA into the host chromosome, has no mammalian counterpart, making it an attractive target for antiviral drug design. As one of the three enzymes produced by HIV, it can be expected that inhibitors of this enzyme will complement the therapeutic use of HIV protease and reverse transcriptase inhibitors. We have determined the structure of a complex of the HIV-1 integrase core domain with a novel inhibitor, 5ClTEP, 1-(5-chloroindol-3-yl)-3-hydroxy-3-(2H-tetrazol-5-yl)-pro penone, to 2.1-A resolution. The inhibitor binds centrally in the active site of the integrase and makes a number of close contacts with the protein. Only minor changes in the protein accompany inhibitor binding. This inhibitor complex will provide a platform for structure-based design of an additional class of inhibitors for antiviral therapy.
8805591	Crystal structure of reduced protein R2 of ribonucleotide reductase: the structural basis for oxygen activation at a dinuclear iron site.	BACKGROUND. Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) catalyze the formation of the deoxyribonucleotides that are essential for DNA synthesis. The R2 subunit of Escherichia coli RNR is a homodimer containing one dinuclear iron centre per monomer. A tyrosyl radical is essential for catalysis, and is formed via a reaction in which the reduced, diferrous form of the iron centre activates dioxygen. To help understand the mechanism of oxygen activation, we examined the structure of the diferrous form of R2. RESULTS. The crystal structures of reduced forms of both wild type R2 and a mutant of R2 (Ser211--> Ala) have been determined at 1.7 A and 2.2 A resolution, respectively. The diferrous iron centre was compared to the previously determined structure of the oxidized, diferric form of R2. In both forms of R2 the iron centre is coordinated by the same carboxylate dominated ligand sphere, but in the reduced form there are clear conformational changes in three of the carboxylate ligands and the bridging mu-oxo group and two water molecules are lost. In the reduced form of R2 the coordination number decreases from six to four for both ferrous ions, explaining their high reactivity towards dioxygen. The structure of the mutant Ser211--> Ala, known to have impaired reduction kinetics, shows a large conformational change in one of the neighbouring helices although the iron coordination is very similar to the wild type protein. CONCLUSIONS. Carboxylate shifts are often important for carboxylate coordinated metal clusters; they allow the metals to achieve different coordination modes in redox reactions. In the case of reduced R2 these carboxylate shifts allow the formation of accessible reaction sites for dioxygen. The Ser211--> Ala mutant displays a conformational change in the helix containing the mutation, explaining its altered reduction kinetics.
1613787	Purification and crystallization of glycogen phosphorylase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.	Glycogen phosphorylase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is activated by the covalent phosphorylation of a single threonine residue in the N terminus of the protein. We have hypothesized that the structural features that effect activation must be distinct from those characterized in rabbit muscle phosphorylase because the two enzymes have unrelated phosphorylation sites located in dissimilar protein contexts. To understand this potentially novel mechanism of activation by phosphorylation, we require information at atomic resolution of the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms of the enzyme. To this end, we have purified, characterized and crystallized glycogen phosphorylase from S. cerevisiae. The enzyme was isolated from a phosphorylase-deficient strain harboring a multicopy plasmid containing the phosphorylase gene under the control of its own promoter. One liter of cultured cells yields 12 mg of crystallizable material. The purified protein was not phosphorylated and had an activity of 4.7 units/mg in the presence of saturating amounts of substrate. Yeast phosphorylase was crystallized in four different crystal forms, only one of which is suitable for diffraction studies at high resolution. The latter belongs to space group P4(1)2(1)2 with unit cell constants of a = 161.1 A and c = 175.5 A Based on the density of the crystals, the solvent content is 49.7%, indicating that the asymmetric unit contains the functional dimer of yeast phosphorylase.
11084036	Waterproofing the heme pocket. Role of proximal amino acid side chains in preventing hemin loss from myoglobin.	The ability of myoglobin to bind oxygen reversibly depends critically on retention of the heme prosthetic group. Globin side chains at the Leu(89)(F4), His(97)(FG3), Ile(99)(FG5), and Leu(104)(G5) positions on the proximal side of the heme pocket strongly influence heme affinity. The roles of these amino acids in preventing heme loss have been examined by determining high resolution structures of 14 different mutants at these positions using x-ray crystallography. Leu(89) and His(97) are important surface amino acids that interact either sterically or electrostatically with the edges of the porphyrin ring. Ile(99) and Leu(104) are located in the interior region of the proximal pocket beneath ring C of the heme prosthetic group. The apolar amino acids Leu(89), Ile(99), and Leu(104) "waterproof" the heme pocket by forming a barrier to solvent penetration, minimizing the size of the proximal cavity, and maintaining a hydrophobic environment. Substitutions with smaller or polar side chains at these positions result in exposure of the heme to solvent, the appearance of crystallographically defined water molecules in or near the proximal pocket, and large increases in the rate of hemin loss. Thus, the naturally occurring amino acid side chains at these positions serve to prevent hydration of the His(93)-Fe(III) bond and are highly conserved in all known myoglobins and hemoglobins.
6822532	The catalytic mechanism of glutathione reductase as derived from x-ray diffraction analyses of reaction intermediates.	The mode of binding of NADPH and oxidized glutathione to the flavoenzyme glutathione reductase has been determined by x-ray crystallography. Furthermore, two intermediates of the reaction have been produced in the crystal and have been structurally elucidated. All these analyses were done at 0.3 nm resolution. The results allow the stereochemical description of the mechanism of the enzyme. The dinucleotide NADPH is bound in an extended conformation with the nicotinamide ring stacking onto the re-face of the flavin part of FAD, and adenine located at the protein surface. The binding of NADPH results in the 2-electron reduced form of the enzyme, EH2. This form has also been analyzed without any ligand bound. In EH2 the redoxactive disulfide bridge of the protein, which lies at the si-face of the flavin ring, is opened and the sulfur of Cys-58 moves by about 0.1 nm into a position where it can attack one of the sulfurs of the substrate oxidized glutathione. This interchange leads to a mixed glutathione-protein disulfide, which can be stabilized in crystals and has been analyzed. By selectively reacting Cys-58 with iodoacetamide the crystalline enzyme can be blocked in its EH2 state. The imidazole of His-467' is near to all sulfurs taking part in the disulfide bridge exchange and is therefore certainly crucial for catalysis. The crystallographic results establish that electrons flow from NADPH to the substrate GSSG via flavin and the redoxactive protein disulfide bridge. This is consistent with the scheme that has been postulated from biochemical, spectroscopic, and model studies.
7836458	How potassium affects the activity of the molecular chaperone Hsc70. II. Potassium binds specifically in the ATPase active site.	Crystallographic anomalous scattering from potassium at 1.7 A resolution reveals two monovalent ions that interact with MgADP and P(i) in the nucleotide binding cleft of wild-type recombinant bovine Hsc70 ATPase fragment. K+ at site 1 interacts with oxygens of the beta-phosphate of ADP, whereas K+ at site 2 interacts with an oxygen of P(i). Both K+ ions also interact with specific H2O molecules in the first hydration shell of the octahedrally coordinated Mg2+ ion and with specific protein ligands. In crystals that have Na+ present, K+ is replaced by a Na+ ion at site 1 and by a Na(+)-H2O pair at site 2. The K+ ions are positioned where they could stabilize binding of a beta,gamma-bidentate MgATP complex with Hsc70, as well as a transition state during ATP hydrolysis, suggesting that monovalent ions act as specific metal cofactors in the ATPase reaction of Hsc70.
9087403	Structure of 20S proteasome from yeast at 2.4 A resolution.	The crystal structure of the 20S proteasome from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae shows that its 28 protein subunits are arranged as an (alpha1...alpha7, beta1...beta7)2 complex in four stacked rings and occupy unique locations. The interior of the particle, which harbours the active sites, is only accessible by some very narrow side entrances. The beta-type subunits are synthesized as proproteins before being proteolytically processed for assembly into the particle. The proforms of three of the seven different beta-type subunits, beta1/PRE3, beta2/PUP1 and beta5/PRE2, are cleaved between the threonine at position 1 and the last glycine of the pro-sequence, with release of the active-site residue Thr 1. These three beta-type subunits have inhibitor-binding sites, indicating that PRE2 has a chymotrypsin-like and a trypsin-like activity and that PRE3 has peptidylglutamyl peptide hydrolytic specificity. Other beta-type subunits are processed to an intermediate form, indicating that an additional nonspecific endopeptidase activity may exist which is important for peptide hydrolysis and for the generation of ligands for class I molecules of the major histocompatibility complex.
10220341	The effects of an engineered cation site on the structure, activity, and EPR properties of cytochrome c peroxidase.	Earlier work [Bonagura et al. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 6107] showed that the K+ site found in the proximal pocket of ascorbate peroxidase (APX) could be engineered into cytochrome c peroxidase (CCP). Binding of K+ at the engineered site results in a loss in activity and destabilization of the CCP compound I Trp191 cationic radical owing to long-range electrostatic effects. The engineered CCP mutant crystal structure has been refined to 1.5 A using data obtained at cryogenic temperatures which provides a more detailed basis for comparison with the naturally occurring K+ site in APX. The characteristic EPR signal associated with the Trp191 radical becomes progressively weaker as K+ is added, which correlates well with the loss in enzyme activity as [K+] is increased. These results coupled with stopped-flow studies support our earlier conclusions that the loss in activity and EPR signal is due to destabilization of the Trp191 cationic radical.
10504240	Contribution of intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonds to the conformational stability of human lysozyme(,).	In globular proteins, there are intermolecular hydrogen bonds between protein and water molecules, and between water molecules, which are bound with the proteins, in addition to intramolecular hydrogen bonds. To estimate the contribution of these hydrogen bonds to the conformational stability of a protein, the thermodynamic parameters for denaturation and the crystal structures of five Thr to Val and five Thr to Ala mutant human lysozymes were determined. The denaturation Gibbs energy (DeltaG) of Thr to Val and Thr to Ala mutant proteins was changed from 4.0 to -5.6 kJ/mol and from 1.6 to -6.3 kJ/mol, respectively, compared with that of the wild-type protein. The contribution of hydrogen bonds to the stability (DeltaDeltaG(HB)) of the Thr and other mutant human lysozymes previously reported was extracted from the observed stability changes (DeltaDeltaG) with correction for changes in hydrophobicity and side chain conformational entropy between the wild-type and mutant structures. The estimation of the DeltaDeltaG(HB) values of all mutant proteins after removal of hydrogen bonds, including protein-water hydrogen bonds, indicates a favorable contribution of the intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonds to the protein stability. The net contribution of an intramolecular hydrogen bond (DeltaG(HB[pp])), an intermolecular one between protein and ordered water molecules (DeltaG(HB[pw])), and an intermolecular one between ordered water molecules (DeltaG(HB[ww])) could be estimated to be 8. 5, 5.2, and 5.0 kJ/mol, respectively, for a 3 A long hydrogen bond. This result shows the different contributions to protein stability of intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonds. The entropic cost due to the introduction of a water molecule (DeltaG(H)()2(O)) could be also estimated to be about 8 kJ/mol.
9568905	Solution structure and dynamics of a designed monomeric variant of the lambda Cro repressor.	The solution structure of a monomeric variant of the lambda Cro repressor has been determined by multidimensional NMR. Cro K56[DGEVK] differs from wild-type Cro by the insertion of five amino acids at the center of the dimer interface. 1H and 15N resonances for 70 of the 71 residues have been assigned. Thirty-two structures were calculated by hybrid distance geometry/simulated annealing methods using 463 NOE-distance restraints, 26 hydrogen-bond, and 39 dihedral-angle restraints. The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) from the average structure for atoms in residues 3-60 is 1.03 +/- 0.44 A for the peptide backbone and 1.6 +/- 0.73 A for all nonhydrogen atoms. The overall structure conforms very well to the original design. Although the five inserted residues form a beta hairpin as expected, this engineered turn as well as other turns in the structure are not well defined by the NMR data. Dynamics studies of backbone amides reveal T1/T2 ratios of residues in the alpha2-alpha3, beta2-beta3, and engineered turn that are reflective of chemical exchange or internal motion. The solution structure and dynamics are discussed in light of the conformational variation that has been observed in other Cro structures, and the importance of flexibility in DNA recognition.
9335537	Probing the roles of active site residues in phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C from Bacillus cereus by site-directed mutagenesis.	The role of amino acid residues located in the active site pocket of phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) from Bacillus cereus[Heinz, D. W., Ryan, M., Bullock, T., & Griffith, O. H. (1995) EMBO J. 14, 3855-3863] was investigated by site-directed mutagenesis, kinetics, and crystal structure analysis. Twelve residues involved in catalysis and substrate binding (His32, Arg69, His82, Gly83, Lys115, Glu117, Arg163, Trp178, Asp180, Asp198, Tyr200, and Asp274) were individually replaced by 1-3 other amino acids, resulting in a total number of 21 mutants. Replacements in the mutants H32A, H32L, R69A, R69E, R69K, H82A, H82L, E117K, R163I, D198A, D198E, D198S, Y200S, and D274S caused essentially complete inactivation of the enzyme. The remaining mutants (G83S, K115E, R163K, W178Y, D180S, Y200F, and D274N) exhibited reduced activities up to 57% when compared with wild-type PI-PLC. Crystal structures determined at a resolution ranging from 2.0 to 2.7 A for six mutants (H32A, H32L, R163K, D198E, D274N, and D274S) showed that significant changes were confined to the site of the respective mutation without perturbation of the rest of the structure. Only in mutant D198E do the side chains of two neighboring arginine residues move across the inositol binding pocket toward the newly introduced glutamic acid. An analysis of these structure-function relationships provides new insight into the catalytic mechanism, and suggests a molecular explanation of some of the substrate stereospecificity and inhibitor binding data available for this enzyme.
16218957	Molecular basis for substrate recognition and drug resistance from 1.1 to 1.6 angstroms resolution crystal structures of HIV-1 protease mutants with substrate analogs.	HIV-1 protease (PR) and two drug-resistant variants--PR with the V82A mutation (PR(V82A)) and PR with the I84V mutation (PR(I84V))--were studied using reduced peptide analogs of five natural cleavage sites (CA-p2, p2-NC, p6pol-PR, p1-p6 and NC-p1) to understand the structural and kinetic changes. The common drug-resistant mutations V82A and I84V alter residues forming the substrate-binding site. Eight crystal structures were refined at resolutions of 1.10-1.60 A. Differences in the PR-analog interactions depended on the peptide sequence and were consistent with the relative inhibition. Analog p6(pol)-PR formed more hydrogen bonds of P2 Asn with PR and fewer van der Waals contacts at P1' Pro compared with those formed by CA-p2 or p2-NC in PR complexes. The P3 Gly in p1-p6 provided fewer van der Waals contacts and hydrogen bonds at P2-P3 and more water-mediated interactions. PR(I84V) showed reduced van der Waals interactions with inhibitor compared with PR, which was consistent with kinetic data. The structures suggest that the binding affinity for mutants is modulated by the conformational flexibility of the substrate analogs. The complexes of PR(V82A) showed smaller shifts of the main chain atoms of Ala82 relative to PR, but more movement of the peptide analog, compared to complexes with clinical inhibitors. PR(V82A) was able to compensate for the loss of interaction with inhibitor caused by mutation, in agreement with kinetic data, but substrate analogs have more flexibility than the drugs to accommodate the structural changes caused by mutation. Hence, these structures help to explain how HIV can develop drug resistance while retaining the ability of PR to hydrolyze natural substrates.
9837729	Structure and functional implications of the polymerase active site region in a complex of HIV-1 RT with a double-stranded DNA template-primer and an antibody Fab fragment at 2.8 A resolution.	The structure of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) complexed with a 19-mer/18-mer double-stranded DNA template-primer (dsDNA) and the Fab fragment of monoclonal antibody 28 (Fab28) has been refined at 2.8 A resolution. The structures of the polymerase active site and neighboring regions are described in detail and a number of novel insights into mechanisms of polymerase catalysis and drug inhibition are presented. The three catalytically essential amino acid residues (Asp110, Asp185, and Asp186) are located close to the 3' terminus of the primer strand. Observation of a hydrogen bond between the 3'-OH of the primer terminus and the side-chain of Asp185 suggests that the carboxylate of Asp185 could act as a general base in initiating the nucleophilic attack during polymerization. Nearly all of the close protein-DNA interactions involve atoms of the sugar-phosphate backbone of the nucleic acid. However, the phenoxyl side-chain of Tyr183, which is part of the conserved YMDD motif, has hydrogen-bonding interactions with nucleotide bases of the second duplex base-pair and is predicted to have at least one hydrogen bond with all Watson-Crick base-pairs at this position. Comparison of the structure of the active site region in the HIV-1 RT/dsDNA complex with all other HIV-1 RT structures suggests that template-primer binding is accompanied by significant conformational changes of the YMDD motif that may be relevant for mechanisms of both polymerization and inhibition by non-nucleoside inhibitors. Interactions of the "primer grip" (the beta12-beta13 hairpin) with the 3' terminus of the primer strand primarily involve the main-chain atoms of Met230 and Gly231 and the primer terminal phosphate. Alternative positions of the primer grip observed in different HIV-1 RT structures may be related to conformational changes that normally occur during DNA polymerization and translocation. In the vicinity of the polymerase active site, there are a number of aromatic residues that are involved in energetically favorable pi-pi interactions and may be involved in the transitions between different stages of the catalytic process. The protein structural elements primarily responsible for precise positioning of the template-primer (including the primer grip, template grip, and helices alphaH and alphaI of the p66 thumb) can be thought of functioning as a "translocation track" that guides the relative movement of nucleic acid and protein during polymerization.
11914073	Crystallographic evidence of a transglycosylation reaction: ternary complexes of a psychrophilic alpha-amylase.	The psychrophilic Pseudoalteromonas haloplanctis alpha-amylase is shown to form ternary complexes with two alpha-amylase inhibitors present in the active site region, namely, a molecule of Tris and a trisaccharide inhibitor or heptasaccharide inhibitor, respectively. The crystal structures of these complexes have been determined by X-ray crystallography to 1.80 and 1.74 A resolution, respectively. In both cases, the prebound inhibitor Tris is expelled from the active site by the incoming oligosaccharide inhibitor substrate analogue, but stays linked to it, forming well-defined ternary complexes with the enzyme. These results illustrate competition in the crystalline state between two inhibitors, an oligosaccharide substrate analogue and a Tris molecule, bound at the same time in the active site region. Taken together, these structures show that the enzyme performs transglycosylation in the complex with the pseudotetrasaccharide acarbose (confirmed by a mutant structure), leading to a well-defined heptasaccharide, considered as a more potent inhibitor. Furthermore, the substrate-induced ordering of water molecules within a channel highlights a possible pathway used for hydrolysis of starch and related poly- and oligosaccharides.
7929197	Fine tuning the specificity of the periplasmic phosphate transport receptor. Site-directed mutagenesis, ligand binding, and crystallographic studies.	Phosphorous, primarily in the form of phosphate, is a critical nutrient for the life of a cell. We have previously determined the 1.7-A resolution structure of the phosphate-binding protein, an initial receptor for the high-affinity phosphate active transport system or permease in Escherichia coli (Luecke, H., and Quiocho, F.A. (1990) Nature 347, 402-406). This structure is the first to reveal the key role of hydrogen bonding interactions in conferring the high specificity of the permease, a specificity also shared by other phosphate transport systems. Both monobasic and dibasic phosphates are recognized by the phosphate-binding protein with Asp56 playing a key role. Here we report site-directed mutagenesis, ligand binding, and crystallographic studies of the binding protein which show that introduction of one additional Asp by mutagenesis of the Thr141 in the ligand-binding site restricts binding to only the monobasic phosphate.
1522592	Crystal structure of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase from Escherichia coli at 3.0 A resolution. A target enzyme for chemotherapy.	The atomic structure of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase, an essential enzyme in purine biosynthesis, has been determined at 3.0 A resolution. The last three C-terminal residues and a sequence stretch of 18 residues (residues 113 to 130) are not visible in the electron density map. The enzyme forms a dimer in the crystal structure. Each monomer is divided into two domains, which are connected by a central mainly parallel seven-stranded beta-sheet. The N-terminal domain contains a Rossmann type mononucleotide fold with a phosphate ion bound to the C-terminal end of the first beta-strand. A long narrow cleft stretches from the phosphate to a conserved aspartic acid, Asp144, which has been suggested as an active-site residue. The cleft is lined by a cluster of residues, which are conserved between bacterial, yeast, avian and human enzymes, and likely represents the binding pocket and active site of the enzyme. GAR Tfase binds a reduced folate cofactor and glycinamide ribonucleotide for the catalysis of one of the initial steps in purine biosynthesis. Folate analogs and multi-substrate inhibitors of the enzyme have antineoplastic effects and the structure determination of the unliganded enzyme and enzyme-inhibitor complexes will aid the development of anti-cancer drugs.
1324167	X-ray structure of nucleoside diphosphate kinase.	The X-ray structure of a point mutant of nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDP kinase) from Dictyostelium discoideum has been determined to 2.2 A resolution. The enzyme is a hexamer made of identical subunits with a novel mononucleotide binding fold. Each subunit contains an alpha/beta domain with a four stranded, antiparallel beta-sheet. The topology is different from adenylate kinase, but identical to the allosteric domain of Escherichia coli ATCase regulatory subunits, which bind mononucleotides at an equivalent position. Dimer contacts between NDP kinase subunits within the hexamer are similar to those in ATCase. Trimer contacts involve a large loop of polypeptide chain that bears the site of the Pro----Ser substitution in Killer of prune (K-pn) mutants of the highly homologous Drosophila enzyme. Properties of Drosophila NDP kinase, the product of the awd developmental gene, and of the human enzyme, the product of the nm23 genes in tumorigenesis, are discussed in view of the three-dimensional structure and of possible interactions of NDP kinase with other nucleotide binding proteins.
12575936	A novel protein fold and extreme domain swapping in the dimeric TorD chaperone from Shewanella massilia.	TorD is the cytoplasmic chaperone involved in the maturation of the molybdoenzyme TorA prior to the translocation of the folded protein into the periplasm. The X-ray structure at 2.4 A resolution of the TorD dimer reveals extreme domain swapping between the two subunits. The all-helical architecture of the globular domains within the intertwined molecular dimer shows no similarity with known protein structures. According to sequence similarities, this new fold probably represents the architecture of the chaperones associated with the bacterial DMSO/TMAO reductases and also that of proteins of yet unknown functions. The occurrence of multiple oligomeric forms and the chaperone activity of both monomeric and dimeric TorD raise questions about the possible biological role of domain swapping in this protein.
8906788	Structure of the complex between human T-cell receptor, viral peptide and HLA-A2.	Recognition by a T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) of peptide complexed with a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule occurs through variable loops in the TCR structure which bury almost all the available peptide and a much larger area of the MHC molecule. The TCR fits diagonally across the MHC peptide-binding site in a surface feature common to all class I and class II MHC molecules, providing evidence that the nature of binding is general. A broadly applicable binding mode has implications for the mechanism of repertoire selection and the magnitude of alloreactions.
10091652	The solution structure of a superpotent B-chain-shortened single-replacement insulin analogue.	This paper reports on an insulin analogue with 12.5-fold receptor affinity, the highest increase observed for a single replacement, and on its solution structure, determined by NMR spectroscopy. The analogue is [D-AlaB26]des-(B27-B30)-tetrapeptide-insulin-B26-amide. C-terminal truncation of the B-chain by four (or five) residues is known not to affect the functional properties of insulin, provided the new carboxylate charge is neutralized. As opposed to the dramatic increase in receptor affinity caused by the substitution of D-Ala for the wild-type residue TyrB26 in the truncated molecule, this very substitution reduces it to only 18% of that of the wild-type hormone when the B-chain is present in full length. The insulin molecule in solution is visualized as an ensemble of conformers interrelated by a dynamic equilibrium. The question is whether the "active" conformation of the hormone, sought after in innumerable structure/function studies, is or is not included in the accessible conformational space, so that it could be adopted also in the absence of the receptor. If there were any chance for the active conformation, or at least a predisposed state to be populated to a detectable extent, this chance should be best in the case of a superpotent analogue. This was the motivation for the determination of the three-dimensional structure of [D-AlaB26]des-(B27-B30)-tetrapeptide-insulin-B26-amide. However, neither the NMR data nor CD spectroscopic comparison of a number of related analogues provided a clue concerning structural features predisposing insulin to high receptor affinity. After the present study it seems more likely than before that insulin will adopt its active conformation only when exposed to the force field of the receptor surface.
8706862	A covalently bound catalytic intermediate in Escherichia coli asparaginase: crystal structure of a Thr-89-Val mutant.	Escherichia coli asparaginase II catalyzes the hydrolysis of L-asparagine to L-aspartate via a threonine-bound acyl-enzyme intermediate. A nearly inactive mutant in which one of the active site threonines, Thr-89, was replaced by valine was constructed, expressed, and crystallized. Its structure, solved at 2.2 A resolution, shows high overall similarity to the wild-type enzyme, but an aspartyl moiety is covalently bound to Thr-12, resembling a reaction intermediate. Kinetic analysis confirms the deacylation deficiency, which is also explained on a structural basis. The previously identified oxyanion hole is described in more detail.
15805589	Structure of pyrR (Rv1379) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis: a persistence gene and protein drug target.	The Mycobacterium tuberculosis pyrR gene (Rv1379) encodes a protein that regulates the expression of pyrimidine-nucleotide biosynthesis (pyr) genes in a UMP-dependent manner. Because pyrimidine biosynthesis is an essential step in the progression of TB, the gene product pyrR is an attractive antitubercular drug target. The 1.9 A native structure of Mtb pyrR determined by the TB Structural Genomics Consortium facilities in trigonal space group P3(1)21 is reported, with unit-cell parameters a = 66.64, c = 154.72 A at 120 K and two molecules in the asymmetric unit. The three-dimensional structure and residual uracil phosphoribosyltransferase activity point to a common PRTase ancestor for pyrR. However, while PRPP- and UMP-binding sites have been retained in Mtb pyrR, a distinct dimer interaction among subunits creates a deep positively charged cleft capable of binding pyr mRNA. In silico screening of pyrimidine-nucleoside analogs has revealed a number of potential lead compounds that, if bound to Mtb pyrR, could facilitate transcriptional attenuation, particularly cyclopentenyl nucleosides.
9918723	The crystal structure of the sevenfold mutant of barley beta-amylase with increased thermostability at 2.5 A resolution.	The three-dimensional structure of the sevenfold mutant of barley beta-amylase (BBA-7s) with increased thermostability was determined by X-ray crystallography. The enzyme was purified as a single component and crystallized by a hanging drop method in the presence of 14 % PEG 6000. The crystals belong to space group P43212 with cell dimensions a=b=72.11 A, c=250.51 A. The diffraction data up to 2.5 A were collected after soaking the crystal in 100 mM maltose with Rsym of 8.6 %. The structure was determined by a molecular replacement method using soybean beta-amylase (SBA) as a search model and refined to an R-factor of 18.7 %. The final model included 500 amino acid residues, 141 water molecules and three glucose residues, which were located at subsites 1-2 and 4 in the active site. The r.m.s. distance of 485 Calpha atoms between BBA-7s and SBA was 0.62 A. Out of the seven mutated amino acids, four (Ser295Ala, Ile297Val, Ser351Pro and Ala376Ser) were substitutions from the common residues with SBA to the thermostable forms. A comparison of the structures of BBA-7s and SBA indicated that the side-chain of Ser376 makes new hydrogen bonds to the main-chain of an adjacent beta-strand, and that the side-chains of Val297 reduce an unfavorable interaction between the side-chains of Ala314. The mutation of Ser295Ala breaks the hydrogen bond between Ser295 OG and Tyr195 OH, which seems to be the reason for the unoccupied glucose residue at subsite 3. The tandem mutations at 350-352 including substitutions to two Pro residues suggested the reduction of main-chain entropy in the unfolded structure of this solvent-exposed protruded loop.
9174360	Glutathione reductase turned into trypanothione reductase: structural analysis of an engineered change in substrate specificity.	Trypanosoma and Leishmania, pathogens responsible for diseases such as African sleeping sickness, Chagas' heart disease, or Oriental sore, are two of the very few genera that do not use the ubiquitous glutathione/glutathione reductase system to keep a stable cellular redox balance. Instead, they rely on trypanothione and trypanothione reductase to protect them from oxidative stress. Trypanothione reductase (TR) and the corresponding host enzyme, human red blood cell glutathione reductase (GR), belong to the same flavoprotein family. Despite their closely related three-dimensional structures and although their natural substrates share the common structural glutathione core, the two enzymes are mutually exclusive with respect to their disulfide substrates. This makes the parasite enzyme a potential target for antitrypanosomal drug design. While a large body of structural data on GR complexes is available, information on TR-ligand interactions is very limited. When the two amino acid changes Ala34Glu and Arg37Trp are introduced into human GR, the resulting mutant enzyme (GRTR) prefers trypanothione 700-fold over its original substrate, effectively converting a GR into a TR [Bradley, M., B|cheler, U. S., & Walsh, C. T. (1991) Biochemistry 30, 6124-6127]. The crystal structure of GRTR has been determined at 2.3 A resolution and refined to a crystallographic R factor of 20.9%. We have taken advantage of the ease with which ligand complexes can be produced in GR crystals, a property that extends to the isomorphous GRTR crystals, and have produced and analyzed crystals of GRTR complexes with glutathione, trypanothione, glutathionylspermidine and of a true catalytic intermediate, the mixed disulfide between trypanothione and the enzyme. The corresponding molecular structures have been characterized at resolutions between 2.3 and 2.8 A with R factors ranging from 17.1 to 19.7%. The results indicate that the Ala34Glu mutation causes steric hindrance leading to a large displacement of the side chain of Arg347. This movement combined with the change in charge introduced by the mutations modifies the binding cavity, forcing glutathione to adopt a nonproductive binding mode and permitting trypanothione and to a certain degree also the weak substrate glutathionylspermidine to assume a productive mode.
16134930	4-Aryl-1,2,3-triazole: a novel template for a reversible methionine aminopeptidase 2 inhibitor, optimized to inhibit angiogenesis in vivo.	Inhibitors of human methionine aminopeptidase type 2 (hMetAP2) are of interest as potential treatments for cancer. A new class of small molecule reversible inhibitors of hMetAP2 was discovered and optimized, the 4-aryl-1,2,3-triazoles. Compound 24, a potent inhibitor of cobalt-activated hMetAP2, also inhibits human and mouse endothelial cell growth. Using a mouse matrigel model, this reversible hMetAP2 inhibitor was also shown to inhibit angiogenesis in vivo.
8383239	WIN 52035-2 inhibits both attachment and eclipse of human rhinovirus 14.	WIN compounds inhibit attachment of human rhinovirus 14 by binding to a hydrophobic pocket within the capsid and inducing conformational changes in the canyon floor, the region that binds the cellular receptor. To study the basis of drug resistance, we isolated and characterized a family of human rhinovirus 14 mutants resistant to WIN 52035-2. Thermostabilization data and single-cycle growth curves provided evidence for two classes of resistant mutants. One class, here called exclusion mutants, showed a marked decrease in drug-binding affinity and was characterized by substitution to bulkier amino acid side chains at two sites lining the hydrophobic pocket. The other class, called compensation mutants, displayed single-amino-acid substitutions in the drug-deformable regions of the canyon; these mutants were able to attach to cells despite the presence of bound drug. A delay in the rise period of the growth curves of compensation mutants indicated a second locus of drug action. WIN 52035-2 was found to inhibit the first step of uncoating, release of VP4. Attempts to identify this site of drug action by using single-step growth curves were obscured by abortive elution of a major fraction of cell-attached virus. The drug had no effect on the rate of this process but did affect the spectrum of particles produced.
12578369	Structural and biochemical exploration of a critical amino acid in human 8-oxoguanine glycosylase.	Members of the HhH-GPD superfamily of DNA glycosylases are responsible for the recognition and removal of damaged nucleobases from DNA. The hallmark of these proteins is a motif comprising a helix-hairpin-helix followed by a Gly/Pro-rich loop and terminating in an invariant, catalytically essential aspartic acid residue. In this study, we have probed the role of this Asp in human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (hOgg1) by mutating it to Asn (D268N), Glu (D268E), and Gln (D268Q). We show that this aspartate plays a dual role, acting both as an N-terminal alpha-helix cap and as a critical residue for catalysis of both base excision and DNA strand cleavage by hOgg1. Mutation of this residue to asparagine, another helix-capping residue, preserves stability of the protein while drastically reducing enzymatic activity. A crystal structure of this mutant is the first to reveal the active site nucleophile Lys249 in the presence of lesion-containing DNA; this structure offers a tantalizing suggestion that base excision may occur by cleavage of the glycosidic bond and then attachment of Lys249. Mutation of the aspartic acid to glutamine and glutamic acid destabilizes the protein fold to a significant extent but, surprisingly, preserves catalytic activity. Crystal structures of these mutants complexed with an unreactive abasic site in DNA reveal these residues to adopt a sterically disfavored helix-capping conformation.
12820884	Structural and functional importance of first-shell metal ligands in the binuclear manganese cluster of arginase I.	Arginase is a binuclear manganese metalloenzyme that hydrolyzes l-arginine to form l-ornithine and urea. The three-dimensional structures of D128E, D128N, D232A, D232C, D234E, H101N, and H101E arginases I have been determined by X-ray crystallographic methods to elucidate the roles of the first-shell metal ligands in the stability and catalytic activity of the enzyme. This work represents the first structure-based dissection of the binuclear manganese cluster using site-directed mutagenesis and X-ray crystallography. Substitution of the metal ligands compromises the catalytic activity of the enzyme, either by the loss or disruption of the metal cluster or the nucleophilic metal-bridging hydroxide ion. However, the substitution of the metal ligands or the reduction of Mn(2+)(A) or Mn(2+)(B) occupancy does not compromise enzyme-substrate affinity as reflected by K(M), which remains relatively invariant across this series of arginase variants. This implicates a nonmetal binding site for substrate l-arginine in the precatalytic Michaelis complex, as proposed based on analysis of the native enzyme structure (Kanyo, Z. F., Scolnick, L. R., Ash, D. E., and Christianson, D. W. (1996) Nature 383, 554-557).
11080143	Crystal structure of the Xrcc4 DNA repair protein and implications for end joining.	XRCC4 is essential for carrying out non-homologous DNA end joining (NHEJ) in all eukaryotes and, in particular, V(D)J recombination in vertebrates. Xrcc4 protein forms a complex with DNA ligase IV that rejoins two DNA ends in the last step of V(D)J recombination and NHEJ to repair double strand breaks. XRCC4-defective cells are extremely sensitive to ionizing radiation, and disruption of the XRCC4 gene results in embryonic lethality in mice. Here we report the crystal structure of a functional fragment of Xrcc4 at 2.7 A resolution. Xrcc4 protein forms a strikingly elongated dumb-bell-like tetramer. Each of the N-terminal globular head domains consists of a beta-sandwich and a potentially DNA-binding helix- turn-helix motif. The C-terminal stalk comprising a single alpha-helix >120 A in length is partly incorporated into a four-helix bundle in the Xrcc4 tetramer and partly involved in interacting with ligase IV. The Xrcc4 structure suggests a possible mode of coupling ligase IV association with DNA binding for effective ligation of DNA ends.
15819891	Small exterior hydrophobic cluster contributes to conformational stability and steroid binding in ketosteroid isomerase from Pseudomonas putida biotype B.	A structural motif called the small exterior hydrophobic cluster (SEHC) has been proposed to explain the stabilizing effect mediated by solvent-exposed hydrophobic residues; however, little is known about its biological roles. Unusually, in Delta(5)-3-ketosteroid isomerase from Pseudomonas putida biotype B (KSI-PI) Trp92 is exposed to solvent on the protein surface, forming a SEHC with the side-chains of Leu125 and Val127. In order to identify the role of the SEHC in KSI-PI, mutants of those amino acids associated with the SEHC were prepared. The W92A, L125A/V127A, and W92A/L125A/V127A mutations largely decreased the conformational stability, while the L125F/V127F mutation slightly increased the stability, indicating that hydrophobic packing by the SEHC is important in maintaining stability. The crystal structure of W92A revealed that the decreased stability caused by the removal of the bulky side-chain of Trp92 could be attributed to the destabilization of the surface hydrophobic layer consisting of a solvent-exposed beta-sheet. Consistent with the structural data, the binding affinities for three different steroids showed that the surface hydrophobic layer stabilized by SEHC is required for KSI-PI to efficiently recognize hydrophobic steroids. Unfolding kinetics based on analysis of the Phi(U) value also indicated that the SEHC in the native state was resistant to the unfolding process, despite its solvent-exposed site. Taken together, our results demonstrate that the SEHC plays a key role in the structural integrity that is needed for KSI-PI to stabilize the hydrophobic surface conformation and thereby contributes both to the overall conformational stability and to the binding of hydrophobic steroids in water solution.
10545177	Role of disulfide bonds in the structure and potassium channel blocking activity of ShK toxin.	ShK toxin, a potassium channel blocker from the sea anemone Stichodactyla helianthus, is a 35 residue polypeptide cross-linked by three disulfide bridges: Cys3-Cys35, Cys12-Cys28, and Cys17-Cys32. To investigate the role of these disulfides in the structure and channel-blocking activity of ShK toxin, a series of analogues was synthesized by selective replacement of each pair of half-cystines with two alpha-amino-butyrate (Abu) residues. The remaining two disulfide pairs were formed unambiguously using an orthogonal protecting group strategy of Cys(Trt) or Cys(Acm) at the appropriate position. The peptides were tested in vitro for their ability to block Kv1.1 and Kv1.3 potassium channels and their ability to displace [(125)I]dendrotoxin binding to rat brain synaptosomal membranes. The monocyclic peptides showed no activity in these assays. Of the dicyclic peptides, [Abu12,28]ShK(3-35,17)(-)(32) (where the subscript indicates disulfide connectivities) had weak activity on Kv1.3 and Kv1.1. [Abu17,32]ShK(3-35,12)(-)(28) blocked Kv1.3 with low nanomolar potency, but was less effective (being comparable to [Abu12,28]ShK(3-35,17)(-)(32)) against Kv1.1. [Abu3, 35]ShK(12-28,17)(-)(32), retained high picomolar affinity against both channels. Corroborating these results, [Abu3,35]ShK(12-28, 17)(-)(32) had an IC(50) ratio relative to native toxin of 18 in the displacement assay, whereas [Abu17,32]ShK(3-35,12)(-)(28) and [Abu12, 28]ShK(3-35,17)(-)(32) had ratios of 69 and 390, respectively. Thus, the disulfide bond linking the N- and C-terminal regions is less important for activity than the internal disulfides. NMR analysis of the [Abu12,28] and [Abu17,32] analogues indicated that they had little residual structure, consistent with their significantly reduced activities. By contrast, [Abu3,35]ShK(12-28,17)(-)(32) had a moderately well-defined solution structure, with a mean pairwise root-mean-square deviation of 1.33 A over the backbone heavy atoms. This structure nevertheless showed significant differences from that of native ShK toxin. The possible interactions of this analogue with the channel and the distinction between native secondary and tertiary structure on one hand and global topology imposed by the disulfide bridges on the other are discussed.
11875520	The crystal structure of class II ribonucleotide reductase reveals how an allosterically regulated monomer mimics a dimer.	Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) catalyze the conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides, an essential step in DNA biosynthesis and repair. Here we present the crystal structure of class II (coenzyme B12-dependent) ribonucleoside triphosphate reductase (RTPR) from Lactobacillus leichmannii in the apo enzyme form and in complex with the B12 analog adeninylpentylcobalamin at 1.75 and 2.0 A resolution, respectively. This monomeric, allosterically regulated class II RNR retains all the key structural features associated with the catalytic and regulatory machinery of oligomeric RNRs. Surprisingly, the dimer interface responsible for effector binding in class I RNR is preserved through a single 130-residue insertion in the class II structure. Thus, L. leichmannii RNR is a paradigm for the simplest structural entity capable of ribonucleotide reduction, a reaction linking the RNA and DNA worlds.
7788295	Solution structure of human thioredoxin in a mixed disulfide intermediate complex with its target peptide from the transcription factor NF kappa B.	BACKGROUND: Human thioredoxin is a 12 kDa cellular redox protein that plays a key role in maintaining the redox environment of the cell. It has recently been shown to be responsible for activating the DNA-binding properties of the cellular transcription factor, NF kappa B, by reducing a disulfide bond involving Cys62 of the p50 subunit. Using multidimensional heteronuclear-edited and hetero-nuclear-filtered NMR spectroscopy, we have solved the solution structure of a complex of human thioredoxin and a 13-residue peptide extending from residues 56-68 of p50, representing a kinetically stable mixed disulfide intermediate along the reaction pathway. RESULTS: The NF kappa B peptide is located in a long boot-shaped cleft on the surface of human thioredoxin delineated by the active-site loop, helices alpha 2, alpha 3 and alpha 4, and strands beta 3 and beta 4. The peptide adopts a crescent-like conformation with a smooth 110 degrees bend centered around residue 60 which permits it to follow the path of the cleft. CONCLUSIONS: In addition to the intermolecular disulfide bridge between Cys32 of human thioredoxin and Cys62 of the peptide, the complex is stabilized by numerous hydrogen-bonding, electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions which involve residues 57-65 of the NF kappa B peptide and confer substrate specificity. These structural features permit one to suggest the specificity requirements for human thioredoxin-catalyzed disulfide bond reduction of proteins.
9632735	TorD, a cytoplasmic chaperone that interacts with the unfolded trimethylamine N-oxide reductase enzyme (TorA) in Escherichia coli.	Reduction of trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) in Escherichia coli involves the terminal molybdoreductase TorA, located in the periplasm, and the membrane anchored c type cytochrome TorC. In this study, the role of the TorD protein, encoded by the third gene of torCAD operon, is investigated. Construction of a mutant, in which the torD gene is interrupted, showed that the absence of TorD protein leads to a two times decrease of the final amount of TorA enzyme. However, specific activity and biochemical properties of TorA enzyme were similar to those of the enzyme produced in the wild type. Excess of TorD protein restores the normal level of TorA enzyme, and also, leads to the appearance of a new cytoplasmic form of TorA on SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis using gentle conditions. This probably indicates a new folding state of the cytoplasmic TorA protein when TorD is overexpressed. BIAcore techniques demonstrated direct specific interaction between the TorA and TorD proteins. This interaction was enhanced when TorA was previously unfolded by heating. Finally, as TorA is a molybdoenzyme, we demonstrated that TorD can interact with TorA before the molybdenum cofactor has been inserted. As TorD homologue encoding genes are found in various TMAO reductase loci, we propose that TorD is a chaperone protein specific for the TorA enzyme. It belongs to a family of TorD-like chaperones present in several bacteria, and, probably, involved in TMAO reductase folding.
15654077	Solution structure of enzyme IIA(Chitobiose) from the N,N'-diacetylchitobiose branch of the Escherichia coli phosphotransferase system.	The solution structure of trimeric Escherichia coli enzyme IIA(Chb) (34 kDa), a component of the N,N'-diacetylchitobiose/lactose branch of the phosphotransferase signal transduction system, has been determined by NMR spectroscopy. Backbone residual dipolar couplings were used to provide long range orientational restraints, and long range (|i - j| > or = 5 residues) nuclear Overhauser enhancement restraints were derived exclusively from samples in which at least one subunit was 15N/13C/2H/(Val-Leu-Ile)-methyl-protonated. Each subunit consists of a three-helix bundle. Hydrophobic residues lining helix 3 of each subunit are largely responsible for the formation of a parallel coiled-coil trimer. The active site histidines (His-89 from each subunit) are located in three symmetrically placed deep crevices located at the interface of two adjacent subunits (A and C, C and B, and B and A). Partially shielded from bulk solvent, structural modeling suggests that phosphorylated His-89 is stabilized by electrostatic interactions with the side chains of His-93 from the same subunit and Gln-91 from the adjacent subunit. Comparison with the x-ray structure of Lactobacillus lactis IIA(Lac) reveals some substantial structural differences, particularly in regard to helix 3, which exhibits a 40 degrees kink in IIA(Lac) versus a 7 degrees bend in IIA(Chb). This is associated with the presence of an unusually large (230-angstroms3) buried hydrophobic cavity at the trimer interface in IIA(Lac) that is reduced to only 45 angstroms3) in IIA(Chb).
7568230	Structures of the apo- and the metal ion-activated forms of the diphtheria tox repressor from Corynebacterium diphtheriae.	The diphtheria tox repressor (DtxR) of Corynebacterium diphtheriae plays a critical role in the regulation of diphtheria toxin expression and the control of other iron-sensitive genes. The crystal structures of apo-DtxR and of the metal ion-activated form of the repressor have been solved and used to identify motifs involved in DNA and metal ion binding. Residues involved in binding of the activated repressor to the diphtheria tox operator, glutamine 43, arginine 47, and arginine 50, were located and confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis. Previous biochemical and genetic data can be explained in terms of these structures. Conformational differences between apo- and Ni-DtxR are discussed with regard to the mechanism of action of this repressor.
2499260	S-adenosyl-L-methionine:trans-caffeoyl-coenzyme A 3-O-methyltransferase from elicitor-treated parsley cell suspension cultures.	An S-adenosyl-L-methionine:caffeoyl-CoA 3-O-methyltransferase was purified 82-fold from elicitor-induced parsley cell suspension cultures by ammonium sulfate fractionation, anionic exchange and hydrophobic interaction chromatographies, and chromatofocusing. The enzyme has an apparent pI of 5.7 and a molecular weight of approx 48,000 determined by gel filtration chromatography. Maximal activity was observed at pH 7.5 in 50 mM phosphate or Tris-HCl buffers and the additional presence of 0.5 M NaCl. The methyltransferase activity was dependent on Mg2+, whereas EDTA, Mn2+, and Ca2+ inhibited the reaction. The partially purified enzyme efficiently catalyzed the methylation of caffeoyl-CoA, but also accepted with low affinity various other caffeic esters as substrates. Dark-grown parsley cells contained considerable methyltransferase activity which was nevertheless increased approx threefold within 12 h following the addition of a crude fungal elicitor to the cell suspensions. We propose that the O-methyltransferase activity is an important component in the rapid resistance response of the cells, which depends on the formation of cell wall-bound ferulic polymers.
12679341	Roles of calcium ions in the activation and activity of the transglutaminase 3 enzyme.	The transglutaminase 3 enzyme is widely expressed in many tissues including epithelia. We have shown previously that it can bind three Ca2+ ions, which in site one is constitutively bound, while those in sites two and three are acquired during activation and are required for activity. In particular, binding at site three opens a channel through the enzyme and exposes two tryptophan residues near the active site that are thought to be important for enzyme reaction. In this study, we have solved the structures of three more forms of this enzyme by x-ray crystallography in the presence of Ca2+ and/or Mg2+, which provide new insights on the precise contribution of each Ca2+ ion to activation and activity. First, we found that Ca2+ ion in site one can be exchanged with difficulty, and it has a binding affinity of Kd = 0.3 microm (DeltaH = -6.70 +/- 0.52 kcal/mol), which suggests it is important for the stabilization of the enzyme. Site two can be occupied by some lanthanides but only Ca2+ of the Group 2 family of alkali earth metals, and its occupancy are required for activity. Site three can be occupied by some lanthanides, Ca2+,or Mg2+; however, when Mg2+ is present, the enzyme is inactive, and the channel is closed. Thus Ca2+ binding in both sites two and three cooperate in opening the channel. We speculate that manipulation of the channel opening could be controlled by intracellular cation levels. Together, these data have important implications for reaction mechanism of the enzyme: the opening of a channel perhaps controls access to and manipulation of substrates at the active site.
7592925	Mechanism of regulation in yeast glycogen phosphorylase.	The mechanism of yeast glycogen phosphorylase activation by covalent phosphorylation involves structural elements distinct from the mammalian homologs. To understand the role of the amino-terminal 39-residue extension in the phosphorylation control mechanism, mutants with 22 and 42 amino-terminal residues removed were expressed in Escherichia coli, and their properties were compared with the wild-type (WT) enzyme. The unphosphorylated WT enzyme had a specific activity of 0.1 unit/mg and was not activated significantly by the substrate, glucose 1-phosphate. Phosphorylation by protein kinase resulted in a 1300-fold activation. Glucose 6-phosphate inhibited the unphosphorylated enzyme more effectively than the phosphorylated form, and inhibition of the latter was cooperative. Glucose was a poor inhibitor for both the unphosphorylated and phosphorylated WT enzyme with Ki > 300 mM. The rate of phosphorylation by protein kinase depended on substrates and interactions of the amino terminus. Maltoheptaose increased the rate of phosphorylation of the WT enzyme by yeast phosphorylase kinase 5-fold. The 22-residue deletion mutant (Nd22) had overall kinetic properties similar to the WT enzyme, except that Nd22 was a better substrate for the protein kinase and the rate of phosphorylation was unaffected by maltoheptaose. The 42-residue deletion mutant (Nd42), which lacks the phosphorylation site, was measurably active, although much less active than phosphorylated WT. Sedimentation equilibrium analysis indicated that the WT, Nd22, and Nd42 exist as tetramer, partially dissociated tetramer, and dimer, respectively. Phosphorylation of the WT and Nd22 converted both to dimer. The results indicated that the amino terminus affects quaternary structure and mediates activity regulation through conformational transition.
11916385	Solution structure of protein SRP19 of Archaeoglobus fulgidus signal recognition particle.	Protein SRP19 is an essential RNA-binding component of the signal recognition particle (SRP) in Archaea and Eucarya. A three-dimensional solution structure of the 104 residue SRP19 from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus, designated as Af19, was determined by NMR spectroscopy. Af19 contains three beta-strands, two alpha-helical regions, arranged in a betaalphabetabetaalpha topology, a 3(10) helix, and a disordered C-terminal tail. This fold is similar to the betaalphabetabetaalphabeta RNP motif present in numerous other RNA-binding proteins, which engage their cognate RNAs using conserved sequence motifs present within beta-strands 1 and 3. Mutagenesis studies of human SRP19, however, reveal the major contact sites with SRP RNA reside within loops 1, 3, and 4. These contacts were verified by the crystal structure of human SRP19 complexed to SRP RNA helix 6 reported subsequent to the submission of the manuscript. The crystal structure also reveals that, unlike canonical RNP motifs, SRP19 does not engage specific RNA bases through conserved sequence motifs present within beta-strands 1 and 3. Instead, SRP19 uses residues both within and flanking beta-strand 1 to stabilize the complex through direct and indirect contacts to the phosphate backbone of the tetraloop, leaving the bases of the tetraloop exposed. This, coupled with the fact that SRP19 appears relatively rigid and undergoes only minor changes in structure upon RNA binding, may underlie the molecular basis by which SRP19 functions to initiate SRP assembly.
15731407	Crystal structure of the malaria vaccine candidate apical membrane antigen 1.	Apical membrane antigen 1 from Plasmodium is a leading malaria vaccine candidate. The protein is essential for host-cell invasion, but its molecular function is unknown. The crystal structure of the three domains comprising the ectoplasmic region of the antigen from P. vivax, solved at 1.8 angstrom resolution, shows that domains I and II belong to the PAN motif, which defines a superfamily of protein folds implicated in receptor binding. We also mapped the epitope of an invasion-inhibitory monoclonal antibody specific for the P. falciparum ortholog and modeled this to the structure. The location of the epitope and current knowledge on structure-function correlations for PAN domains together suggest a receptor-binding role during invasion in which domain II plays a critical part. These results are likely to aid vaccine and drug design.
2092358	The cellobiose permease of Escherichia coli consists of three proteins and is homologous to the lactose permease of Staphylococcus aureus.	The cellobiose (cel) operon of Escherichia coli was recently sequenced and shown to consist of five genes, celABCDF (Parker and Hall, 1990). We have shown that the CelA, CelB and CelC proteins possess amino acid sequences which are homologous to different domains of the lactose permease of Staphylococcus aureus. CelB corresponds to the integral membrane portion of the permease (IIcel) while CelC (IIIcel) and CelA (IVcel) correspond to the two cytoplasmic domains which appear to comprise the first and second phosphorylation sites in the permease, respectively. The cellobiose permease is the only one of several homologous sequenced permeases of the phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system which has its three known functional domains residing on distinct polypeptide chains.
11306569	Amylosucrase, a glucan-synthesizing enzyme from the alpha-amylase family.	Amylosucrase (E.C. 2.4.1.4) is a member of Family 13 of the glycoside hydrolases (the alpha-amylases), although its biological function is the synthesis of amylose-like polymers from sucrose. The structure of amylosucrase from Neisseria polysaccharea is divided into five domains: an all helical N-terminal domain that is not similar to any known fold, a (beta/alpha)(8)-barrel A-domain, B- and B'-domains displaying alpha/beta-structure, and a C-terminal eight-stranded beta-sheet domain. In contrast to other Family 13 hydrolases that have the active site in the bottom of a large cleft, the active site of amylosucrase is at the bottom of a pocket at the molecular surface. A substrate binding site resembling the amylase 2 subsite is not found in amylosucrase. The site is blocked by a salt bridge between residues in the second and eight loops of the (beta/alpha)(8)-barrel. The result is an exo-acting enzyme. Loop 7 in the amylosucrase barrel is prolonged compared with the loop structure found in other hydrolases, and this insertion (forming domain B') is suggested to be important for the polymer synthase activity of the enzyme. The topology of the B'-domain creates an active site entrance with several ravines in the molecular surface that could be used specifically by the substrates/products (sucrose, glucan polymer, and fructose) that have to get in and out of the active site pocket.
7545077	Structure of HIV-1 RT/TIBO R 86183 complex reveals similarity in the binding of diverse nonnucleoside inhibitors.	We report the structure of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) complexed with the nonnucleoside inhibitor TIBO R 86183 at 3.0 A resolution. Comparing this structure with those of complexes of HIV-1 RT/alpha-APA R 95845 and HIV-1 RT/nevirapine provides a basis for understanding the nature of nonnucleoside inhibitor binding, the structure of the binding site and the interactions between the bound inhibitors and surrounding amino acid residues as well as for understanding mechanisms of inhibition by and resistance to nonnucleoside inhibitors. All three inhibitors considered assume a similar butterfly-like shape and bind to HIV-1 RT in a very similar way. Important differences occur in the conformation of amino acid residues that form the binding pocket.
15644204	Tracking the evolution of porphobilinogen synthase metal dependence in vitro.	Metal ions are indispensable cofactors for chemical catalysis by a plethora of enzymes. Porphobilinogen synthases (PBGSs), which catalyse the second step of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis, are grouped according to their dependence on Zn(2+). Using site-directed mutagenesis, we embarked on transforming Zn(2+)-independent Pseudomonas aeruginosa PBGS into a Zn(2+)-dependent enzyme. Nine PBGS variants were generated by permutationally introducing three cysteine residues and a further two residues into the active site of the enzyme to match the homologous Zn(2+)-containing PBGS from Escherichia coli. Crystal structures of seven enzyme variants were solved to elucidate the nature of Zn(2+) coordination at high resolution. The three single-cysteine variants were invariably found to be enzymatically inactive and only one (D139C) was found to bind detectable amounts of Zn(2+). The double mutant A129C/D139C is enzymatically active and binds Zn(2+) in a tetrahedral coordination. Structurally and functionally it mimics mycobacterial PBGS, which bears an equivalent Zn(2+)-coordination site. The remaining two double mutants, without known natural equivalents, reveal strongly distorted tetrahedral Zn(2+)-binding sites. Variant A129C/D131C possesses weak PBGS activity while D131C/D139C is inactive. The triple mutant A129C/D131C/D139C, finally, displays an almost ideal tetrahedral Zn(2+)-binding geometry and a significant Zn(2+)-dependent enzymatic activity. Two additional amino acid exchanges further optimize the active site architecture towards the E.coli enzyme with an additional increase in activity. Our study delineates the potential evolutionary path between Zn(2+)-free and Zn(2+)-dependent PBGS enyzmes showing that the rigid backbone of PBGS enzymes is an ideal framework to create or eliminate metal dependence through a limited number of amino acid exchanges.
15501821	Crystal structure of human maspin, a serpin with antitumor properties: reactive center loop of maspin is exposed but constrained.	Maspin, a member of the serpin superfamily, has tumor suppressing activity against breast and prostate cancer. Maspin inhibits tumor growth by blocking cell invasion, and its reactive center loop (RCL) is thought to mediate this activity. To understand this function on the molecular level, we have solved the three-dimensional structure of Maspin to 3.1 A resolution. The molecular structure shows the characteristic features of the serpin fold, but the RCL of Maspin is unique in length, composition, and placement. Although the RCL of Maspin is accessible and cleavable by some proteinases, it functions in the uncleaved, constrained conformation observed here. These structural results will contribute to our understanding of the mechanism by which Maspin suppresses tumors.
10207002	Quantitative and qualitative analysis of type III antifreeze protein structure and function.	Some cold water marine fishes avoid cellular damage because of freezing by expressing antifreeze proteins (AFPs) that bind to ice and inhibit its growth; one such protein is the globular type III AFP from eel pout. Despite several studies, the mechanism of ice binding remains unclear because of the difficulty in modeling the AFP-ice interaction. To further explore the mechanism, we have determined the x-ray crystallographic structure of 10 type III AFP mutants and combined that information with 7 previously determined structures to mainly analyze specific AFP-ice interactions such as hydrogen bonds. Quantitative assessment of binding was performed using a neural network with properties of the structure as input and predicted antifreeze activity as output. Using the cross-validation method, a correlation coefficient of 0.60 was obtained between measured and predicted activity, indicating successful learning and good predictive power. A large loss in the predictive power of the neural network occurred after properties related to the hydrophobic surface were left out, suggesting that van der Waal's interactions make a significant contribution to ice binding. By combining the analysis of the neural network with antifreeze activity and x-ray crystallographic structures of the mutants, we extend the existing ice-binding model to a two-step process: 1) probing of the surface for the correct ice-binding plane by hydrogen-bonding side chains and 2) attractive van der Waal's interactions between the other residues of the ice-binding surface and the ice, which increases the strength of the protein-ice interaction.
14514675	Electrostatic environment at the active site of prolyl oligopeptidase is highly influential during substrate binding.	The positive electrostatic environment of the active site of prolyl oligopeptidase was investigated by using substrates with glutamic acid at positions P2, P3, P4, and P5, respectively. The different substrates gave various pH rate profiles. The pKa values extracted from the curves are apparent parameters, presumably affected by the nearby charged residues, and do not reflect the ionization of a simple catalytic histidine as found in the classic serine peptidases like chymotrypsin and subtilisin. The temperature dependence of kcat/Km did not produce linear Arrhenius plots, indicating different changes in the individual rate constants with the increase in temperature. This rendered it possible to calculate these constants, i.e. the formation (k1) and decomposition (k-1) of the enzyme-substrate complex and the acylation constant (k2), as well as the corresponding activation energies. The results have revealed the relationship between the complex Michaelis parameters and the individual rate constants. Structure determination of the enzyme-substrate complexes has shown that the different substrates display a uniform binding mode. None of the glutamic acids interacts with a charged group. We conclude that the specific rate constant is controlled by k1 rather than k2 and that the charged residues from the substrate and the enzyme can markedly affect the formation but not the structure of the enzyme-substrate complexes.
11827530	Exploring the role and the binding affinity of a second zinc equivalent in B. cereus metallo-beta-lactamase.	Metallo-beta-lactamases are a newly characterized family of zinc enzymes present in several pathogenic strains that represent an emerging clinical threat. Enzymes from different organisms exhibit an outstanding functional diversity, particularly in the metal ion requirements for activity. We have investigated the effect of the second zinc(II) equivalent in the enzyme betaLII from Bacillus cereus, naturally active in the mono-zinc(II) form. The enzyme is reversibly inactivated at low pH, due to dissociation of the two zinc(II) equivalents. The pH profile indicates that zinc-bound water in the mono-zinc(II) enzyme possesses a pK(a) below 4.9, indicating that a second zinc(II) equivalent is not needed for nucleophile activation. Instead, the second zinc(II) may contribute to properly anchor Asp120, that ultimately orients the attacking nucleophile in binuclear enzymes. This role may be fulfilled by Arg121 in mono-zinc enzymes, as suggested by the kinetic study of the R121C mutant in betaLII. In addition, it is demonstrated that Arg121 is not responsible for the low binding affinity of betaLII toward a second zinc(II) equivalent.
2061330	The crystal structure of a mutant human lysozyme C77/95A with increased secretion efficiency in yeast.	The three-dimensional structure of a mutant human lysozyme, C77/95A, in which residues Cys77 and Cys95 were replaced by alanine, was determined at 1.8-A resolution by x-ray crystallography. The properties of this mutant protein have been well characterized with respect to its thermal stability and secretion efficiency in a yeast expression system. The overall three-dimensional structure of C77/95A was found to be essentially identical to that of the wild-type human lysozyme, although the coordinates were shifted by more than 0.5 A and the thermal factors of the main-chain atoms were increased in the vicinity of residue 77. The reduction in thermal stability of this mutant has been previously explained by an increase in entropy of the unfolded state. In addition, a packing defect (cavity) produced by the removal of the disulfide bond was detected in the three-dimensional structure of C77/95A. This cavity can also be a reason why the stability of the protein is reduced because the free energy of the folded state could be expected to increase. The increased secretion efficiency cannot be due mainly to the three-dimensional structure, but may possibly be related to some event in the pathway of protein secretion. One of the possibilities might involve molecular flexibilities in the secondary or tertiary structure for lack of one of the disulfide bonds.
15062092	X-Ray structure determination of three mutants of the bacterial photosynthetic reaction centers from Rb. sphaeroides; altered proton transfer pathways.	In the photosynthetic reaction center (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, the reduction of a bound quinone molecule Q(B) is coupled with proton uptake. When Asp-L213 is replaced by Asn, proton transfer is inhibited. Proton transfer was restored by two second-site revertant mutations, Arg-M233-->Cys and Arg-H177-->His. Kinetic effects of Cd(2+) on proton transfer showed that the entry point in revertant RCs to be the same as in the native RC. The structures of the parental and two revertant RCs were determined at resolutions of 2.10, 1.80, and 2.75 A. From the structures, we were able to delineate alternate proton transfer pathways in the revertants. The main changes occur near Glu-H173, which allow it to substitute for the missing Asp-L213. The electrostatic changes near Glu-H173 cause it to be a good proton donor and acceptor, and the structural changes create a cavity which accommodates water molecules that connect Glu-H173 to other proton transfer components.
10702294	Re-engineering of human urokinase provides a system for structure-based drug design at high resolution and reveals a novel structural subsite.	Inhibition of urokinase has been shown to slow tumor growth and metastasis. To utilize structure-based drug design, human urokinase was re-engineered to provide a more optimal crystal form. The redesigned protein consists of residues Ile(16)-Lys(243) (in the chymotrypsin numbering system; for the urokinase numbering system it is Ile(159)-Lys(404)) and two point mutations, C122A and N145Q (C279A and N302Q). The protein yields crystals that diffract to ultra-high resolution at a synchrotron source. The native structure has been refined to 1.5 A resolution. This new crystal form contains an accessible active site that facilitates compound soaking, which was used to determine the co-crystal structures of urokinase in complex with the small molecule inhibitors amiloride, 4-iodo-benzo(b)thiophene-2-carboxamidine and phenylguanidine at 2. 0-2.2 A resolution. All three inhibitors bind at the primary binding pocket of urokinase. The structures of amiloride and 4-iodo-benzo(b)thiophene-2-carboxamidine also reveal that each of their halogen atoms are bound at a novel structural subsite adjacent to the primary binding pocket. This site consists of residues Gly(218), Ser(146), and Cys(191)-Cys(220) and the side chain of Lys(143). This pocket could be utilized in future drug design efforts. Crystal structures of these three inhibitors in complex with urokinase reveal strategies for the design of more potent nonpeptidic urokinase inhibitors.
11124036	Structure-activity relationships in a peptidic alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist.	alpha-Conotoxins are small disulfide-constrained peptide toxins which act as antagonists at specific subtypes of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nACh receptors). In this study, we analyzed the structures and activities of three mutants of alpha-conotoxin ImI, a 12 amino acid peptide active at alpha7 nACh receptors, in order to gain insight into the primary and tertiary structural requirements of neuronal alpha-conotoxin specificity. NMR solution structures were determined for mutants R11E, R7L, and D5N, resulting in representative ensembles of 20 conformers with average pairwise RMSD values of 0.46, 0.52, and 0.62 A from their mean structures, respectively, for the backbone atoms N, C(alpha), and C' of residues 2-11. The R11E mutant was found to have activity near that of wild-type ImI, while R7L and D5N demonstrated activities reduced by at least two orders of magnitude. Comparison of the structures reveals a common two-loop architecture, with variations observed in backbone and side-chain dihedral angles as well as surface electrostatic potentials upon mutation. Correlation of these structures and activities with those from previously published studies emphasizes that existing hypotheses regarding the molecular determinants of alpha-conotoxin specificity are not adequate for explaining peptide activity, and suggests that more subtle features, visualized here at the atomic level, are important for receptor binding. These data, in conjunction with reported characterizations of the acetylcholine binding site, support a model of toxin activity in which a single solvent-accessible toxin side-chain anchors the complex, with supporting weak interactions determining both the efficacy and the subtype specificity of the inhibitory activity.
7479879	Crystal structure of Pseudomonas aeruginosa catabolic ornithine transcarbamoylase at 3.0-A resolution: a different oligomeric organization in the transcarbamoylase family.	The crystal structure of the Glu-105-->Gly mutant of catabolic ornithine transcarbamoylase (OTCase; carbamoyl phosphate + L-ornithine = orthophosphate + L-citrulline, EC 2.1.3.3) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa has been determined at 3.0-A resolution. This mutant is blocked in the active R (relaxed) state. The structure was solved by the molecular replacement method, starting from a crude molecular model built from a trimer of the catalytic subunit of another transcarbamoylase, the extensively studied aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase) from Escherichia coli. This model was used to generate initial low-resolution phases at 8-A resolution, which were extended to 3-A by noncrystallographic symmetry averaging. Four phase extensions were required to obtain an electron density map of very high quality from which the final model was built. The structure, including 4020 residues, has been refined to 3-A, and the current crystallographic R value is 0.216. No solvent molecules have been added to the model. The catabolic OTCase is a dodecamer composed of four trimers organized in a tetrahedral manner. Each monomer is composed of two domains. The carbamoyl phosphate binding domain shows a strong structural homology with the equivalent ATCase part. In contrast, the other domain, mainly implicated in the binding of the second substrate (ornithine for OTCase and aspartate for ATCase) is poorly conserved. The quaternary structures of these two allosteric transcarbamoylases are quite divergent: the E. coli ATCase has pseudo-32 point-group symmetry, with six catalytic and six regulatory chains; the catabolic OTCase has 23 point-group symmetry and only catalytic chains. However, both enzymes display homotropic and heterotropic cooperativity.
1438822	[The genome structure of plant viruses with single-stranded positive sense RNA]	null
9546221	The crystal structure of Dps, a ferritin homolog that binds and protects DNA.	The crystal structure of Dps, a DNA-binding protein from starved E. coli that protects DNA from oxidative damage, has been solved at 1.6 A resolution. The Dps monomer has essentially the same fold as ferritin, which forms a 24-mer with 432 symmetry, a hollow core and pores at the three-fold axes. Dps forms a dodecamer with 23 (tetrahedral) point group symmetry which also has a hollow core and pores at the three-folds. The structure suggests a novel DNA-binding motif and a mechanism for DNA protection based on the sequestration of Fe ions.
10210191	Structural comparisons of TIM barrel proteins suggest functional and evolutionary relationships between beta-galactosidase and other glycohydrolases.	Beta-galactosidase (lacZ) from Escherichia coli is a 464 kDa homotetramer. Each subunit consists of five domains, the third being an alpha/beta barrel that contains most of the active site residues. A comparison is made between each of the domains and a large set of proteins representative of all structures from the protein data bank. Many structures include an alpha/beta barrel. Those that are most similar to the alpha/beta barrel of E. coli beta-galactosidase have similar catalytic residues and belong to the so-called "4/7 superfamily" of glycosyl hydrolases. The structure comparison suggests that beta-amylase should also be included in this family. Of three structure comparison methods tested, the "ProSup" procedure of Zu-Kang and Sippl and the "Superimpose" procedure of Diederichs were slightly superior in discriminating the members of this superfamily, although all procedures were very powerful in identifying related protein structures. Domains 1, 2, and 4 of E. coli beta-galactosidase have topologies related to "jelly-roll barrels" and "immunoglobulin constant" domains. This fold also occurs in the cellulose binding domains (CBDs) of a number of glycosyl hydrolases. The fold of domain 1 of E. coli beta-galactosidase is closely related to some CBDs, and the domain contributes to substrate binding, but in a manner unrelated to cellulose binding by the CBDs. This is typical of domains 1, 2, 4, and 5, which appear to have been recruited to play roles in beta-galactosidase that are unrelated to the functions that such domains provide in other contexts. It is proposed that beta-galactosidase arose from a prototypical single domain alpha/beta barrel with an extended active site cleft. The subsequent incorporation of elements from other domains could then have reduced the size of the active site from a cleft to a pocket to better hydrolyze the disaccharide lactose and, at the same time, to facilitate the production of inducer, allolactose.
2542566	Genetic and molecular analyses of spontaneous mutants of human rhinovirus 14 that are resistant to an antiviral compound.	Spontaneous mutants of human rhinovirus 14 resistant to WIN 52084, an antiviral compound that inhibits attachment to cells, were isolated by selecting plaques that developed when wild-type virus was plated in the presence of high (2 micrograms/ml) or low (0.1 to 0.4 micrograms/ml) concentrations of the compound. Two classes of drug resistance were observed: a high-resistance (HR) class with a frequency of about 4 x 10(-5), and a low-resistance (LR) class with a 10- to 30-fold-higher frequency. The RNA genomes of 56 HR mutants and 13 LR mutants were sequenced in regions encoding the drug-binding site. The HR mutations mapped to only 2 of the 16 amino acid residues that form the walls of the drug-binding pocket. The side chains of these two residues point directly into the pocket and were invariably replaced by bulkier groups. These findings, and patterns of resistance to related WIN compounds, support the concept that HR mutations may hinder the entry or seating of drug within the binding pocket. In contrast, all of the LR mutations mapped to portions of the polypeptide chain near the canyon floor that move when the drug is inserted. Because several LR mutations partially reverse the attachment-inhibiting effect of WIN compounds, these mutants provide useful tools for studying the regions of the capsid structure involved in attachment. This paper shows that the method of escape mutant analysis, previously used to identify antibody binding sites on human rhinovirus 14, is also applicable to analysis of antiviral drug activity.
8673607	A ligand-gated, hinged loop rearrangement opens a channel to a buried artificial protein cavity.	Conformational changes that gate the access of substrates or ligands to an active site are important features of enzyme function. In this report, we describe an unusual example of a structural rearrangement near a buried artificial cavity in cytochrome c peroxidase that occurs on binding protonated benzimidazole. A hinged main-chain rotation at two residues (Pro 190 and Asn 195) results in a surface loop rearrangement that opens a large solvent-accessible channel for the entry of ligands to an otherwise inaccessible binding site. The trapping of this alternate conformational state provides a unique view of the extent to which protein dynamics can allow small molecule penetration into buried protein cavities.
14744126	Tazobactam forms a stoichiometric trans-enamine intermediate in the E166A variant of SHV-1 beta-lactamase: 1.63 A crystal structure.	Many pathogenic bacteria develop antibiotic resistance by utilizing beta-lactamases to degrade penicillin-like antibiotics. A commonly prescribed mechanism-based inhibitor of beta-lactamases is tazobactam, which can function either irreversibly or in a transient manner. We have demonstrated previously that the reaction between tazobactam and a deacylation deficient variant of SHV-1 beta-lactamase, E166A, could be followed in single crystals using Raman microscopy [Helfand, M. S., et al. (2003) Biochemistry 42, 13386-13392]. The Raman data show that maximal populations of an enamine-like intermediate occur 20-30 min after "soaking in" has commenced. By flash-freezing crystals in this time frame, we were able to trap the enamine species. The resulting 1.63 A resolution crystal structure revealed tazobactam covalently bound in the trans-enamine intermediate state with close to 100% occupancy in the active site. The Raman data also indicated that tazobactam forms a larger population of enamine than sulbactam or clavulanic acid does and that tazobactam's intermediate is also the most long-lived. The crystal structure provides a rationale for this finding since only tazobactam is able to form favorable intra- and intermolecular interactions in the active site that stabilize this trans-enamine intermediate. These interactions involve both the sulfone and triazolyl groups that distinguish tazobactam from clavulanic acid and sulbactam, respectively. The observed stabilization of the transient intermediate of tazobactam is thought to contribute to tazobactam's superior in vitro and in vivo clinical efficacy. Understanding the structural details of differing inhibitor effectiveness can aid the design of improved mechanism-based beta-lactamase inhibitors.
10811642	Catalytic roles for two water bridged residues (Asp-98 and His-255) in the active site of copper-containing nitrite reductase.	Two active site residues, Asp-98 and His-255, of copper-containing nitrite reductase (NIR) from Alcaligenes faecalis have been mutated to probe the catalytic mechanism. Three mutations at these two sites (D98N, H255D, and H255N) result in large reductions in activity relative to native NIR, suggesting that both residues are involved intimately in the reaction mechanism. Crystal structures of these mutants have been determined using data collected to better than 1. 9-A resolution. In the native structure, His-255 Nepsilon2 forms a hydrogen bond through a bridging water molecule to the side chain of Asp-98, which also forms a hydrogen bond to a water or nitrite oxygen ligated to the active site copper. In the D98N mutant, reorientation of the Asn-98 side chain results in the loss of the hydrogen bond to the copper ligand water, consistent with a negatively charged Asp-98 directing the binding and protonation of nitrite in the native enzyme. An additional solvent molecule is situated between residues 255 and the bridging water in the H255N and H255D mutants and likely inhibits nitrite binding. The interaction of His-255 with the bridging water appears to be necessary for catalysis and may donate a proton to reaction intermediates in addition to Asp-98.
11023780	Increasing the thermostability of staphylococcal nuclease: implications for the origin of protein thermostability.	Seven hyper-stable multiple mutants have been constructed in staphylococcal nuclease by various combinations of eight different stabilizing single mutants. The stabilities of these multiple mutants determined by guanidine hydrochloride denaturation were 3.4 to 5.6 kcal/mol higher than that of the wild-type. Their thermal denaturation midpoint temperatures were 12.6 to 22.9 deg. C higher than that of the wild-type. These are among the greatest increases in protein stability and thermal denaturation midpoint temperature relative to the wild-type yet attained. There has been great interest in understanding how proteins found in thermophilic organisms are stabilized. One frequently cited theory is that the packing of hydrophobic side-chains is improved in the cores of proteins isolated from thermophiles when compared to proteins from mesophiles. The crystal structures of four single and five multiple stabilizing mutants of staphylococcal nuclease were solved to high resolution. No large overall structural change was found, with most changes localized around the sites of mutation. Rearrangements were observed in the packing of side-chains in the major hydrophobic core, although none of the mutations was in the core. It is surprising that detailed structural analysis showed that packing had improved, with the volume of the mutant protein's hydrophobic cores decreasing as protein stability increased. Further, the number of van der Waals interactions in the entire protein showed an experimentally significant increase correlated with increasing stability. These results indicate that optimization of packing follows as a natural consequence of increased protein thermostability and that good packing is not necessarily the proximate cause of high stability. Another popular theory is that thermostable proteins have more electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interactions and these are responsible for the high stabilities. The mutants here show that increased numbers of electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interactions are not obligatory for large increases in protein stability.
15576031	Structural and functional properties of the human notch-1 ligand binding region.	We present NMR structural and dynamics analysis of the putative ligand binding region of human Notch-1, comprising EGF-like domains 11-13. Functional integrity of an unglycosylated, recombinant fragment was confirmed by calcium-dependent binding of tetrameric complexes to ligand-expressing cells. EGF modules 11 and 12 adopt a well-defined, rod-like orientation rigidified by calcium. The interdomain tilt is similar to that found in previously studied calcium binding EGF pairs, but the angle of twist is significantly different. This leads to an extended double-stranded beta sheet structure, spanning the two EGF modules. Based on the conservation of residues involved in interdomain hydrophobic packing, we propose this arrangement to be prototypical of a distinct class of EGF linkages. On this premise, we have constructed a model of the 36 EGF modules of the Notch extracellular domain that enables predictions to be made about the general role of calcium binding to this region.
3122831	Serine protease mechanism: structure of an inhibitory complex of alpha-lytic protease and a tightly bound peptide boronic acid.	The structure of the complex formed between alpha-lytic protease, a serine protease secreted by Lysobacter enzymogenes, and N-tert-butyloxycarbonylalanylprolylvaline boronic acid (Ki = 0.35 nM) has been studied by X-ray crystallography to a resolution of 2.0 A. The active-site serine forms a covalent, nearly tetrahedral adduct with the boronic acid moiety of the inhibitor. The complex is stabilized by seven hydrogen bonds between the enzyme and inhibitor with additional stabilization arising from van der Waals interactions between enzyme and inhibitor side chains and the burying of 330 A2 of hydrophobic surface area. Hydrogen bonding between Asp-102 and His-57 remains intact in the enzyme-inhibitor complex, and His N epsilon 2 is well positioned to donate its hydrogen to the leaving group. Little change in the positions of protease residues was observed on complex formation (root mean square main chain deviation = 0.13 A), suggesting that in its native state the enzyme is complementary to tetrahedral reaction intermediates or to the nearly tetrahedral transition state for the reaction.
14507721	NMR solution structure and topological orientation of monomeric phospholamban in dodecylphosphocholine micelles.	Phospholamban is an integral membrane protein that regulates the contractility of cardiac muscle by maintaining cardiomyocyte calcium homeostasis. Abnormalities in association of protein kinase A with PLB have recently been linked to human heart failure, where a single mutation is responsible for dilated cardiomyopathy. To date, a high-resolution structure of phospholamban in a lipid environment has been elusive. Here, we describe the first structure of recombinant, monomeric, biologically active phospholamban in lipid-mimicking dodecylphosphocholine micelles as determined by multidimensional NMR experiments. The overall structure of phospholamban is "L-shaped" with the hydrophobic domain approximately perpendicular to the cytoplasmic portion. This is in agreement with our previously published solid-state NMR data. In addition, there are two striking discrepancies between our structure and those reported previously for synthetic phospholamban in organic solvents: a), in our structure, the orientation of the cytoplasmic helix is consistent with the amphipathic nature of these residues; and b), within the hydrophobic helix, residues are positioned on two discrete faces of the helix as consistent with their functional roles ascribed by mutagenesis. This topology renders the two phosphorylation sites, Ser-16 and Thr-17, more accessible to kinases.
10571059	The X-ray crystal structure of beta-ketoacyl [acyl carrier protein] synthase I.	The crystal structure of the fatty acid elongating enzyme beta-ketoacyl [acyl carrier protein] synthase I (KAS I) from Escherichia coli has been determined to 2.3 A resolution by molecular replacement using the recently solved crystal structure of KAS II as a search model. The crystal contains two independent dimers in the asymmetric unit. KAS I assumes the thiolase alpha(beta)alpha(beta)alpha fold. Electrostatic potential distribution reveals an acyl carrier protein docking site and a presumed substrate binding pocket was detected extending the active site. Both subunits contribute to each substrate binding site in the dimer.
7334521	Three-dimensional structure of glutathione reductase at 2 A resolution.	null
12651121	HIV-1 protease variants from 100-fold drug resistant clinical isolates: expression, purification, and crystallization.	High-resolution X-ray crystallographic structures of HIV-1 protease clinical variants complexed with licensed inhibitors are essential to understanding the fundamental cause of protease drug resistance. There is a need for structures of naturally evolved HIV-1 proteases from patients failing antiretroviral therapy. Here, we report the expression, purification, and crystallization of clinical isolates of HIV-1 protease that have been characterized to be more than 100 times less susceptible to US FDA approved protease inhibitors.
11527705	Evolution of anti-HIV drug candidates. Part 3: Diarylpyrimidine (DAPY) analogues.	The synthesis and anti-HIV-1 activity of a series of diarylpyrimidines (DAPYs) are described. Several members of this novel class of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) are extremely potent against both wild-type and a panel of clinically significant single- and double-mutant strains of HIV-1.
16281058	Structural basis for UTP specificity of RNA editing TUTases from Trypanosoma brucei.	Trypanosomatids are pathogenic protozoa that undergo a unique form of post-transcriptional RNA editing that inserts or deletes uridine nucleotides in many mitochondrial pre-mRNAs. Editing is catalyzed by a large multiprotein complex, the editosome. A key editosome enzyme, RNA editing terminal uridylyl transferase 2 (TUTase 2; RET2) catalyzes the uridylate addition reaction. Here, we report the 1.8 A crystal structure of the Trypanosoma brucei RET2 apoenzyme and its complexes with uridine nucleotides. This structure reveals that the specificity of the TUTase for UTP is determined by a crucial water molecule that is exquisitely positioned by the conserved carboxylates D421 and E424 to sense a hydrogen atom on the N3 position of the uridine base. The three-domain structure also unveils a unique domain arrangement not seen before in the nucleotidyltansferase superfamily, with a large domain insertion between the catalytic aspartates. This insertion is present in all trypanosomatid TUTases. We also show that TbRET2 is essential for survival of the bloodstream form of the parasite and therefore is a potential target for drug therapy.
9546396	The unusual active site of Gal6/bleomycin hydrolase can act as a carboxypeptidase, aminopeptidase, and peptide ligase.	The Gal6 protease is in a class of cysteine peptidases identified by their ability to inactivate the anti-cancer drug bleomycin. The protein forms a barrel structure with the active sites embedded in a channel as in the proteasome. In Gal6 the C termini lie in the active site clefts. We show that Gal6 acts as a carboxypeptidase on its C terminus to convert itself to an aminopeptidase and peptide ligase. The substrate specificity of the peptidase activity is determined by the position of the C terminus of Gal6 rather than the sequence of the substrate. We propose a model to explain these diverse activities and Gal6's singular ability to inactivate bleomycin.
12044159	Interhelical interactions in the gp41 core: implications for activation of HIV-1 membrane fusion.	The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) envelope glycoprotein complex (gp120-gp41) promotes viral entry by mediating the fusion of viral and cellular membranes. Formation of a stable trimer-of-hairpins structure in the gp41 ectodomain brings the two membranes into proximity, leading to membrane fusion. The core of this hairpin structure is a six-helix bundle in which three carboxyl-terminal outer helices pack against an inner trimeric coiled coil. Here we investigate the role of these conserved interhelical interactions on the structure and function of both the envelope glycoprotein and the gp41 core. We have replaced each of the eight amino acids at the buried face of the carboxyl-terminal helix with a representative amino acid, alanine. Structural and physicochemical characterization of the alanine mutants shows that hydrophobic interactions are a dominant factor in the stabilization of the six-helix bundle. Alanine substitutions at the Trp628, Trp631, Ile635, and Ile642 residues also affected envelope processing and/or gp120-gp41 association and abrogated the ability of the envelope glycoprotein to mediate cell-cell fusion. These results suggest that the amino-terminal region of the gp41 outer-layer alpha-helix plays a key role in the sequence of events associated with HIV-1 entry and have implications for the development of antibodies and small-molecule inhibitors of this conserved element.
11382747	Crystal structure of mannanase 26A from Pseudomonas cellulosa and analysis of residues involved in substrate binding.	The crystal structure of Pseudomonas cellulosa mannanase 26A has been solved by multiple isomorphous replacement and refined at 1.85 A resolution to an R-factor of 0.182 (R-free = 0.211). The enzyme comprises (beta/alpha)(8)-barrel architecture with two catalytic glutamates at the ends of beta-strands 4 and 7 in precisely the same location as the corresponding glutamates in other 4/7-superfamily glycoside hydrolase enzymes (clan GH-A glycoside hydrolases). The family 26 glycoside hydrolases are therefore members of clan GH-A. Functional analyses of mannanase 26A, informed by the crystal structure of the enzyme, provided important insights into the role of residues close to the catalytic glutamates. These data showed that Trp-360 played a critical role in binding substrate at the -1 subsite, whereas Tyr-285 was important to the function of the nucleophile catalyst. His-211 in mannanase 26A does not have the same function as the equivalent asparagine in the other GH-A enzymes. The data also suggest that Trp-217 and Trp-162 are important for the activity of mannanase 26A against mannooligosaccharides but are less important for activity against polysaccharides.
6876163	Comparison of the three-dimensional protein and nucleotide structure of the FAD-binding domain of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase with the FAD- as well as NADPH-binding domains of glutathione reductase.	The chain fold of the FAD-binding domain of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase resembles the chain folds of the two nucleotide-binding domains of glutathione reductase. This fold consists of a four-stranded parallel beta-sheet sandwiched between a three-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet and alpha-helices. The nucleotides bind in similar positions relative to this chain fold. The best superposition of the folds has been established and geometrically quantified, giving rise to an equivalencing scheme for 110 residue positions, of which only four residues are identical in all three domains. It is discussed whether this chain fold is also present in a number of other FAD-binding proteins with known sequence. After the second strand of the parallel beta-sheet both FAD-binding domains contain long chain excursions, which make intimate contacts to rather distant parts of the respective molecules. In the environment of the isoalloxazine rings we observe interesting similarities. In both enzymes the si-face of this ring is covered by polypeptide, and only the re-face is accessible for the cofactor NADPH. Furthermore, there is a long alpha-helix in each enzyme, which points with its N-terminal start to the O-2 alpha region of isoalloxazine. These helices are spatially in the same position with respect to the isoalloxazine ring but are at quite different positions along the polypeptide chain. Since they can stabilize a negative charge around O-2 alpha, they may be important for the catalytic processes.
9578477	Lys42 and Ser42 variants of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens reveal that Arg42 is essential for NADPH binding.	The conserved Arg42 of the flavoprotein p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is located at the entrance of the active site in a loop between helix H2 and sheet E1 of the FAD-binding domain. Replacement of Arg42 by Lys or Ser decreases the turnover rate of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens by more than two orders of magnitude. Rapid reaction kinetics show that the low activity of the Arg42 variants results from impaired binding of NADPH. In contrast to an earlier conclusion drawn for p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, substitution of Arg42 with Ser42 in the enzyme from P. fluorescens hardly disturbs the binding of FAD. Crystals of [Lys42]p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase complexed with 4-hydroxybenzoate diffract to 0.22-nm resolution. The structure of the Lys42 variant is virtually indistinguishable from the native enzyme with the flavin ring occupying the interior position within the active site. Lys42 in the mutant structure interacts indirectly via a solvent molecule with the 3-OH of the adenosine ribose moiety of FAD. Substrate perturbation difference spectra suggest that the Arg42 replacements influence the solvent accessibility of the flavin ring in the oxidized enzyme. In spite of this, the Arg42 variants fully couple enzyme reduction to substrate hydroxylation. Sequence-comparison studies suggest that Arg42 is involved in binding of the 2'-phosphoadenosine moiety of NADPH.
15247245	Crystal structure of the endonuclease domain encoded by the telomere-specific long interspersed nuclear element, TRAS1.	The telomere-specific long interspersed nuclear element, TRAS1, encodes an endonuclease domain, TRAS1-EN, which specifically cleaves the telomeric repeat targets (TTAGG)n of insects and (TTAGGG)n of vertebrates. To elucidate the sequence-specific recognition properties of TRAS1-EN, we determined the crystal structure at 2.4-A resolution. TRAS1-EN has a four-layered alpha/beta sandwich structure; its topology is similar to apurinic/apyrimidinic endonucleases, but the beta-hairpin (beta10-beta11) at the edge of the DNA-binding surface makes an extra loop that distinguishes TRAS1-EN from cellular apurinic/apyrimidinic endonucleases. A protein-DNA complex model suggests that the beta10-beta11 hairpin fits into the minor groove, enabling interaction with the telomeric repeats. Mutational studies of TRAS1-EN also indicated that the Asp-130 and beta10-beta11 hairpin structure are involved in specific recognition of telomeric repeats.
12206666	Crystallographic investigation of the role of aspartate 95 in the modulation of the redox potentials of Desulfovibrio vulgaris flavodoxin.	The side chain of aspartate 95 in flavodoxin from Desulfovibrio vulgaris provides the closest negative charge to N(1) of the bound FMN in the protein. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to substitute alanine, asparagine, or glutamate for this amino acid to assess the effect of this charge on the semiquinone/hydroquinone redox potential (E(1)) of the FMN cofactor. The D95A mutation shifts the E(1) redox potential positively by 16 mV, while a negative shift of 23 mV occurs in the oxidized/semiquinone midpoint redox potential (E(2)). The crystal structures of the oxidized and semiquinone forms of this mutant are similar to the corresponding states of the wild-type protein. In contrast to the wild-type protein, a further change in structure occurs in the D95A mutant in the hydroquinone form. The side chain of Y98 flips into an energetically more favorable edge-to-face interaction with the bound FMN. Analysis of the structural changes in the D95A mutant, taking into account electrostatic interactions at the FMN binding site, suggests that the pi-pi electrostatic repulsions have only a minor contribution to the very low E(1) redox potential of the FMN cofactor when bound to apoflavodoxin. Substitution of D95 with glutamate causes only a slight perturbation of the two one-electron redox potentials of the FMN cofactor. The structure of the D95E mutant reveals a large movement of the 60-loop (residues 60-64) away from the flavin in the oxidized structure. Reduction of this mutant to the hydroquinone causes the conformation of the 60-loop to revert back to that occurring in the structures of the wild-type protein. The crystal structures of the D95E mutant imply that electrostatic repulsion between a carboxylate on the side chain at position 95 and the phenol ring of Y98 prevents rotation of the Y98 side chain to a more energetically favorable conformation as occurs in the D95A mutant. Replacement of D95 with asparagine has no effect on E(2) but causes E(1) to change by 45 mV. The D95N mutant failed to crystallize. The K(d) values of the protein FMN complex in all three oxidation-reduction states differ from those of the wild-type complexes. Molecular modeling showed that the conformational energy of the protein changes with the redox state, in qualitative agreement with the observed changes in K(d), and allowed the electrostatic interactions between the FMN and the surrounding groups on the protein to be quantified.
11327835	Structural and kinetic analysis of the chemical rescue of the proton transfer function of carbonic anhydrase II.	Histidine 64 in human carbonic anhydrase II (HCA II) functions in the catalytic pathway of CO(2) hydration as a shuttle to transfer protons between the zinc-bound water and bulk water. Catalysis of the exchange of (18)O between CO(2) and water, measured by mass spectrometry, is dependent on this proton transfer and was decreased more than 10-fold for H64A HCA II compared with wild-type HCA II. The loss of catalytic activity of H64A HCA II could be rescued by 4-methylimidazole (4-MI), an exogenous proton donor, in a saturable process with a maximum activity of 40% of wild-type HCA II. The crystal structure of the rescued complex at 1.6 A resolution shows 4-MI bound in the active-site cavity of H64A HCA II, through pi stacking interactions with Trp 5 and H-bonding interactions with water molecules. In this location, 4-MI is about 12 A from the zinc and approximates the observed "out" position of His 64 in the structure of the wild-type enzyme. 4-MI appears to compensate for the absence of His 64 and rescues the catalytic activity of the H64A HCA II mutant. This result strongly suggests that the out conformation of His 64 is effective in the transfer of protons between the zinc-bound solvent molecule and solution.
807574	Crystallization and preliminary x-ray investigation of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens.	P-Hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (EC 1.14.13.2) can be crystallized from 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, 39% saturated ammonium sulfate, and 1mM p-hydroxybenzoate. The space group is C2221 with 8 molecules/unit cell. When p-hydroxybenzoate is removed, the diffraction pattern and the cell dimensions change.
9865957	Probing the ligand binding domain of the GluR2 receptor by proteolysis and deletion mutagenesis defines domain boundaries and yields a crystallizable construct.	Ionotropic glutamate receptors constitute an important family of ligand-gated ion channels for which there is little biochemical or structural data. Here we probe the domain structure and boundaries of the ligand binding domain of the AMPA-sensitive GluR2 receptor by limited proteolysis and deletion mutagenesis. To identify the proteolytic fragments, Maldi mass spectrometry and N-terminal amino acid sequencing were employed. Trypsin digestion of HS1S2 (Chen GQ, Gouaux E. 1997. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:13431-13436) in the presence and absence of glutamate showed that the ligand stabilized the S1 and S2 fragments against complete digestion. Using limited proteolysis and multiple sequence alignments of glutamate receptors as guides, nine constructs were made, folded, and screened for ligand binding activity. From this screen, the S1S21 construct proved to be trypsin- and chymotrypsin-resistant, stable to storage at 4 degrees C, and amenable to three-dimensional crystal formation. The HS1S21 variant was readily prepared on a large scale, the His tag was easily removed by trypsin, and crystals were produced that diffracted to beyond 1.5 A resolution. These experiments, for the first time, pave the way to economical overproduction of the ligand binding domains of glutamate receptors and more accurately map the boundaries of the ligand binding domain.
15296742	Snapshot of protein structure evolution reveals conservation of functional dimerization through intertwined folding.	Protein-protein interactions govern a wide range of cellular processes. Molecular recognition responsible for homodimerization and heterodimerization in the rel/NF-kappaB family of eukaryotic transcription factors relies on a small cluster of hydrophobic residues. We have carried out a structural analysis of six NF-kappaB p50 dimer interface mutants; one of them revealed a remarkable alteration. One or possibly both its mutations cause a switch into an intertwined dimer, in which the molecular partners exchange nearly half of their fold. In spite of the extensive swapping of secondary structure elements, the topology within each counterpart is preserved, with a very similar overall structure and minimal changes at the interface. Thus intertwining rescues structure and function from a destabilizing mutation. Since the mutants originate from a directed evolution experiment and are functional, the data provide an evolutionary snapshot of how a protein structure can respond to mutations while maintaining a functional molecular architecture.
1374166	Structure of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase/DNA complex at 7 A resolution showing active site locations.	AIDS, caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), is one of the world's most serious health problems, with current protocols being inadequate for either prevention or successful long-term treatment. In retroviruses such as HIV, the enzyme reverse transcriptase copies the single-stranded RNA genome into double-stranded DNA that is then integrated into the chromosomes of infected cells. Reverse transcriptase is the target of the most widely used treatments for AIDS, 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) and 2',3'-dideoxyinosine (ddI), but resistant strains of HIV-1 arise in patients after a relatively short time. There are several nonnucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase, but resistance to such agents also develops rapidly. We report here the structure at 7 A resolution of a ternary complex of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase heterodimer, a monoclonal antibody Fab fragment, and a duplex DNA template-primer. The double-stranded DNA binds in a groove on the surface of the enzyme. The electron density near one end of the DNA matches well with the known structure of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase RNase H domain. At the opposite end of the DNA, a mercurated derivative of UTP has been localized by difference Fourier methods, allowing tentative identification of the polymerase nucleoside triphosphate binding site. We also determined the structure of the reverse transcriptase/Fab complex in the absence of template-primer to compare the bound and free forms of the enzyme. The presence of DNA correlates with movement of protein electron density in the vicinity of the putative template-primer binding groove. These results have important implications for developing improved inhibitors of reverse transcriptase for the treatment of AIDS.
15182367	Human salivary alpha-amylase Trp58 situated at subsite -2 is critical for enzyme activity.	The nonreducing end of the substrate-binding site of human salivary alpha-amylase contains two residues Trp58 and Trp59, which belong to beta2-alpha2 loop of the catalytic (beta/alpha)(8) barrel. While Trp59 stacks onto the substrate, the exact role of Trp58 is unknown. To investigate its role in enzyme activity the residue Trp58 was mutated to Ala, Leu or Tyr. Kinetic analysis of the wild-type and mutant enzymes was carried out with starch and oligosaccharides as substrates. All three mutants exhibited a reduction in specific activity (150-180-fold lower than the wild type) with starch as substrate. With oligosaccharides as substrates, a reduction in k(cat), an increase in K(m) and distinct differences in the cleavage pattern were observed for the mutants W58A and W58L compared with the wild type. Glucose was the smallest product generated by these two mutants in the hydrolysis oligosaccharides; in contrast, wild-type enzyme generated maltose as the smallest product. The production of glucose by W58L was confirmed from both reducing and nonreducing ends of CNP-labeled oligosaccharide substrates. The mutant W58L exhibited lower binding affinity at subsites -2, -3 and +2 and showed an increase in transglycosylation activity compared with the wild type. The lowered affinity at subsites -2 and -3 due to the mutation was also inferred from the electron density at these subsites in the structure of W58A in complex with acarbose-derived pseudooligosaccharide. Collectively, these results suggest that the residue Trp58 plays a critical role in substrate binding and hydrolytic activity of human salivary alpha-amylase.
3403560	Multiple genes provide the basis for antifreeze protein diversity and dosage in the ocean pout, Macrozoarces americanus.	The ocean pout (Macrozoarces americanus) produces a set of antifreeze proteins that depresses the freezing point of its blood by binding to, and inhibiting the growth of, ice crystals. The amino acid sequences of all the major components of the ocean pout antifreeze proteins, including the immunologically distinct QAE component, have been derived by Edman degradation. In addition, sequences of several minor components were deduced from DNA sequencing of cDNA and genomic clones. Fifty percent of the amino acids are perfectly conserved in all these proteins as well as in two homologous sequences from the distantly related wolffish. Several of the conserved residues are threonines and asparagines, amino acids that have been implicated in ice binding in the structurally unrelated antifreeze protein of the righteye flounders. Aside from minor differences in post-translational modifications, heterogeneity in antifreeze protein components stems from amino acid differences encoded by multiple genes. Based on genomic Southern blots and library cloning statistics there are 150 copies of the 0.7-kilobase-long antifreeze protein gene in the Newfoundland ocean pout, the majority of which are closely linked but irregularly spaced. A more southerly population of ocean pout from New Brunswick in which the circulating antifreeze protein levels are considerably lower has approximately one-quater as many antifreeze protein genes. Thus, there appears to be a correlation between gene dosage and antifreeze protein levels, and hence the ability to survive in ice-laden seawater. Southern blot comparison of the two populations indicates that the differences in gene dosage were not generated by a simple set of deletions/duplications. They are more likely to be the result of differential amplification.
8107143	Nucleotide sequence and X-ray structure of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase from Bacillus circulans strain 251 in a maltose-dependent crystal form.	The cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase (CGTase, EC 2.4.1.19) gene from Bacillus circulans strain 251 was cloned and sequenced. It was found to code for a mature protein of 686 amino acid residues, showing 75% identity to the CGTase from B. circulans strain 8. The X-ray structure of the CGTase was elucidated in a maltodextrin-dependent crystal form and refined against X-ray diffraction data to 2.0 A resolution. The structure of the enzyme is nearly identical to the CGTase from B. circulans strain 8. Three maltose binding sites are observed at the protein surface, two in domain E and one in domain C. The maltose-dependence of CGTase crystallization can be ascribed to the proximity of two of the maltose binding sites to intermolecular crystal contacts. The maltose molecules bound in the E domain interact with several residues implicated in a raw starch binding motif conserved among a diverse group of starch converting enzymes.
12456667	Structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with pre- and post-translocation AZTMP-terminated DNA.	AZT (3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine) resistance involves the enhanced excision of AZTMP from the end of the primer strand by HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. This reaction can occur when an AZTMP-terminated primer is bound at the nucleotide-binding site (pre-translocation complex N) but not at the 'priming' site (post-translocation complex P). We determined the crystal structures of N and P complexes at 3.0 and 3.1 A resolution. These structures provide insight into the structural basis of AZTMP excision and the mechanism of translocation. Docking of a dNTP in the P complex structure suggests steric crowding in forming a stable ternary complex that should increase the relative amount of the N complex, which is the substrate for excision. Structural differences between complexes N and P suggest that the conserved YMDD loop is involved in translocation, acting as a springboard that helps to propel the primer terminus from the N to the P site after dNMP incorporation.
12925786	Structural studies of hydrogen bonds in the high-affinity streptavidin-biotin complex: mutations of amino acids interacting with the ureido oxygen of biotin.	An elaborate hydrogen-bonding network contributes to the tight binding of biotin to streptavidin. The specific energetic contributions of hydrogen bonds to the biotin ureido oxygen have previously been investigated by mapping the equilibrium and activation thermodynamic signatures of N23A, N23E, S27A, Y43A and Y43F site-directed mutants [Klumb et al. (1998), Biochemistry, 37, 7657-7663]. The crystal structures of these variants in the unbound and biotin-bound states provide structural insight into the energetic alterations and are described here. High (1.5-2.2 A) to atomic resolution (1.14 A) structures were obtained and structural models were refined to R values ranging from 0.12 to 0.20. The overall folding of streptavidin as described previously has not changed in any of the mutant structures. Major deviations such as side-chain shifts of residues in the binding site are observed only for the N23A and Y43A mutations. In none of the mutants is a systematic shift of biotin observed when one of the hydrogen-bonding partners to the ureido oxygen of biotin is removed. Recent thermodynamic studies report increases of DeltaDeltaG(o) of 5.0-14.6 kJ mol(-1) for these mutants with respect to the wild-type protein. The decreasing stabilities of the complexes of the mutants are discussed in terms of their structures.
2691846	Expression and nitrogen-15 labeling of proteins for proton and nitrogen-15 nuclear magnetic resonance.	null
10681546	Phenylethylthiazolylthiourea (PETT) non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 and HIV-2 reverse transcriptases. Structural and biochemical analyses.	Most non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitors are specific for HIV-1 RT and demonstrate minimal inhibition of HIV-2 RT. However, we report that members of the phenylethylthiazolylthiourea (PETT) series of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors showing high potency against HIV-1 RT have varying abilities to inhibit HIV-2 RT. Thus, PETT-1 inhibits HIV-1 RT with an IC(50) of 6 nM but shows only weak inhibition of HIV-2 RT, whereas PETT-2 retains similar potency against HIV-1 RT (IC(50) of 5 nM) and also inhibits HIV-2 RT (IC(50) of 2.2 microM). X-ray crystallographic structure determinations of PETT-1 and PETT-2 in complexes with HIV-1 RT reveal the compounds bind in an overall similar conformation albeit with some differences in their interactions with the protein. To investigate whether PETT-2 could be acting at a different site on HIV-2 RT (e.g. the dNTP or template primer binding site), we compared modes of inhibition for PETT-2 against HIV-1 and HIV-2 RT. PETT-2 was a noncompetitive inhibitor with respect to the dGTP substrate for both HIV-1 and HIV-2 RTs. PETT-2 was also a noncompetitive inhibitor with respect to a poly(rC).(dG) template primer for HIV-2 RT. These results are consistent with PETT-2 binding in corresponding pockets in both HIV-1 and HIV-2 RT with amino acid sequence differences in HIV-2 RT affecting the binding of PETT-2 compared with PETT-1.
8986758	Kinetic and structural analysis of mutant CD4 receptors that are defective in HIV gp120 binding.	The T-cell antigen coreceptor CD4 also serves as the receptor for the envelope glycoprotein gp120 of HIV. Extensive mutational analysis of CD4 has implicated residues from a portion of the extracellular amino-terminal domain (D1) in gp120 binding. However, none of these proteins has been fully characterized biophysically, and thus the precise effects on molecular structure and binding interactions are unknown. In the present study, we produced soluble versions of three mutant CD4 molecules (F43V, G47S, and A55F) and characterized their structural properties, thermostability, and ability to bind gp120. Crystallographic and thermodynamic analysis showed minimal structural alterations in the F43V and G47S mutant proteins, which have solvent-exposed mutant side chains. In contrast, some degree of disorder appears to exist in the folded state of A55F, as a result of mutating a buried side chain. Real time kinetic measurements of the interaction of the mutant proteins with gp120 showed affinity decreases of 5-fold for G47S, 50-fold for A55F, and 200-fold for F43V. Although both rate constants for the binding reaction were affected by these mutations, the loss in affinity was mainly due to a decrease in on rates, with less drastic changes occurring in the off rates. These observations suggest the involvement of conformational adaptation in the CD4-gp120 interaction. Together, the structural and kinetic data confirm that F43V is a critical residue in gp120 recognition site, which may also include main chain interactions at residue Gly-47.
1610820	Contributions of the polar, uncharged amino acids to the stability of staphylococcal nuclease: evidence for mutational effects on the free energy of the denatured state.	In order to quantitate the contributions of the polar, uncharged amino acids to the stability of the native state of staphylococcal nuclease, each of the 13 alanines, 9 glycines, 9 threonines, 6 prolines, 6 glutamines, 6 asparagines, and 3 serines was substituted, either with both alanine and glycine or with 1 of these 2 amino acids plus valine. For each mutant, the stability to reversible denaturation (delta GH2O) was quantitated by determining the Kapp for this reaction as a function of guanidine hydrochloride concentration. In addition, the parameter mGuHCl (= d(delta G)/d[GuHCl]) was calculated from the data. To identify the local structural features responsible for the relatively large and variable changes in delta GH2O and mGuHCl observed for the same type of substitution at different locations in nuclease, statistical correlations were sought between delta GH2O, mGuHCl, and a number of descriptors of the local structure. As with substitutions of the large hydrophobic amino acids [Shortle, D., Stites, W. E., & Meeker, A. K. (1990) Biochemistry 29, 8033-8041], mutation of polar, uncharged residues to Gly leads to a change in stability that, on average, correlates well with the degree to which the wild-type residue is buried. This correlation is especially significant for threonine, an amino acid with both polar and hydrophobic character, but is not demonstrated for the more typically hydrophobic residue alanine. As reported in the previous study of alanine/glycine substitutions of hydrophobic residues, a significant correlation between changes in stability and changes in the value of mGuHCl is again observed, strengthening the conclusion that the putative structural changes in the denatured state which lead to increases or decreases in mGuHCl are responsible for a significant fraction of the stability loss for an average mutant. The existence of this correlation is consistent with the denatured state of wild-type staphylococcal nuclease having evolved to a relatively high free energy via optimization of a balance between a maximal exposure of hydrophobic surface and a minimal gain in chain entropy. On average, mutations are less stable in proportion to the extent of which they perturb this balance. A new and puzzling correlation is reported between the extent of buriedness of a residue in the wild-type native state versus the difference in mGuHCl between the Ala mutation and the Gly mutation at that position.
9654070	Kinetic mechanism of vanillyl-alcohol oxidase with short-chain 4-alkylphenols.	The kinetic mechanism of vanillyl-alcohol oxidase with 4-methylphenol, 4-ethylphenol, 4-propylphenol and their C alpha-deuterated analogs has been studied at pH 7.5 and 25 degrees C. Conversion of 4-methylphenol is extremely slow (0.005 s(-1)) while the enzyme is largely in the reduced form during turnover. 4-Ethylphenol and 4-propylphenol are readily converted while the enzyme is mainly in the oxidized form during turnover. The deuterium kinetic isotope effect for overall catalysis ranges between 7-10 whereas the intrinsic deuterium kinetic isotope effect for flavin reduction ranges over 9-10. With all three 4-alkylphenols, flavin reduction appeared to be a reversible process with the rate of reduction being in the same range as the rate for the reverse reaction. During the reductive half-reaction of vanillyl-alcohol oxidase with 4-ethylphenol and 4-propylphenol, a transient intermediate is formed with an absorbance maximum at 330 nm. This intermediate has been tentatively identified as the p-quinone methide of the aromatic substrate in complex with reduced enzyme. It is concluded that vanillyl-alcohol oxidase catalysis with 4-ethylphenol and 4-propylphenol favors an ordered sequential binding mechanism in which the rate of flavin reduction determines the turnover rate while the reduced enzyme-p-quinone methide binary complex rapidly reacts with dioxygen. During the reaction of vanillyl-alcohol oxidase with 4-methylphenol, a fluorescent enzyme species is stabilized. Based on its spectal characteristics and crystallographic data [Mattevi, A., Fraaije, M. W., Mozzarelli, A., Olivi, L., Coda, A. & van Berkel, W. J. H. (1997) Structure 5, 907-920], it is proposed that this species represents a covalent 5-(4'-hydroxybenzyl)-FAD adduct. With 4-ethylphenol and 4-propylphenol, similar N5 flavin adducts may be formed but their rate of formation is too slow to be of catalytic relevance.
8986757	Chaperone activity and structure of monomeric polypeptide binding domains of GroEL.	The chaperonin GroEL is a large complex composed of 14 identical 57-kDa subunits that requires ATP and GroES for some of its activities. We find that a monomeric polypeptide corresponding to residues 191 to 345 has the activity of the tetradecamer both in facilitating the refolding of rhodanese and cyclophilin A in the absence of ATP and in catalyzing the unfolding of native barnase. Its crystal structure, solved at 2.5 A resolution, shows a well-ordered domain with the same fold as in intact GroEL. We have thus isolated the active site of the complex allosteric molecular chaperone, which functions as a "minichaperone." This has mechanistic implications: the presence of a central cavity in the GroEL complex is not essential for those representative activities in vitro, and neither are the allosteric properties. The function of the allosteric behavior on the binding of GroES and ATP must be to regulate the affinity of the protein for its various substrates in vivo, where the cavity may also be required for special functions.
7619809	Structural studies on the PH domains of Db1, Sos1, IRS-1, and beta ARK1 and their differential binding to G beta gamma subunits.	Pleckstrin homology (PH) domains are approximately 110 amino acid residues in length and are structurally conserved in a number of intracellular signaling proteins. A role for these domains has been postulated for beta ARK, which binds to G beta gamma subunits. We have quantified the binding of individual (His)6-tag PH domains of human Db1, human Sos1, rat IRS-1, human beta ARK, and human beta ARK with an extra 33-residue C-terminal extension (beta ARK + C) to G beta gamma subunits. Our in vitro binding studies show that all of the PH domains (apart from Sos1), bind G beta gamma subunits in a dose-dependent manner, but beta ARK + C binds 4 times as much G beta gamma at saturation as the others. The IRS-1 PH domain has a similar half-maximal concentration of G beta gamma binding (18 nM) to beta ARK + C (30 nM), suggesting that the IRS-1 PH domain has sufficient determinants for G beta gamma binding. The beta ARK PH domain alone has a half-maximal value of 45 nM but a drastically reduced extent of G beta gamma binding, suggesting that both the PH domain and the C-terminal 33 residues are necessary for maximal binding. Db1 has a half-maximum concentration of G beta gamma binding of 45 nM and a maximal extent of binding similar to that of beta ARK, but it is difficult to demonstrate saturable binding of G beta gamma to Sos1. Since it was previously predicted that the C-terminal PH domain of Pleckstrin [Tyers, M., et al. (1988) Nature 333, 470-473] contains a potential calcium binding site, we have tested the different PH domains for calcium binding. Only the PH domain of Db1 bound 45Ca2+ with a Kd of 10 microM. CD spectroscopy of the purified recombinant PH domains indicated that they are predominantly beta-sheet structures.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
2819062	The coenzyme analogue adenosine 5-diphosphoribose displaces FAD in the active site of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase. An x-ray crystallographic investigation.	p-Hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (PHBH) is an NADPH-dependent enzyme. To locate the NADPH binding site, the enzyme was crystallized under anaerobic conditions in the presence of the substrate p-hydroxybenzoate, the coenzyme analogue adenosine 5-diphosphoribose (ADPR), and sodium dithionite. This yielded colorless crystals that were suitable for X-ray analysis. Diffraction data were collected up to 2.7-A resolution. A difference Fourier between data from these colorless crystals and data from yellow crystals of the enzyme-substrate complex showed that in the colorless crystals the flavin ring was absent. The adenosine 5'-diphosphate moiety, which is the common part between FAD and ADPR, was still present. After restrained least-squares refinement of the enzyme-substrate complex with the riboflavin omitted from the model, additional electron density appeared near the pyrophosphate, which indicated the presence of an ADPR molecule in the FAD binding site of PHBH. The complete ADPR molecule was fitted to the electron density, and subsequent least-squares refinement resulted in a final R factor of 16.8%. Replacement of bound FAD by ADPR was confirmed by equilibrium dialysis, where it was shown that ADPR can effectively remove FAD from the enzyme under mild conditions in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. The empty pocket left by the flavin ring is filled by solvent, leaving the architecture of the active site and the binding of the substrate largely unaffected.
11992127	The SAM domain of polyhomeotic forms a helical polymer.	The polycomb group (PcG) proteins are important in the maintenance of stable repression patterns during development. Several PcG members contain a protein protein interaction module called a SAM domain (also known as SPM, PNT and HLH). Here we report the high-resolution structure of the SAM domain of polyhomeotic (Ph). Ph-SAM forms a helical polymer structure, providing a likely mechanism for the extension of PcG complexes. The structure of the polymer resembles that formed by the SAM domain of another transcriptional repressor, TEL. The formation of these polymer structures by SAM domains in two divergent repressors suggests a conserved mode of repression involving a higher order chromatin structure.
2180938	Crystallization of recombinant rat cathepsin B.	A glycosylation-minus mutant of rat cathepsin B expressed in yeast has been purified and crystallized. X-ray diffraction data have been collected and molecular replacement for solving the structure is in progress. The space group for the recombinant rat cathepsin B was determined to be P2(1) with unit cell dimensions alpha = 62.2 A, b = 90.19 A, c = 47.07 A, and beta = 97.43 degrees. A unit cell contains 4 molecules and 2 molecules per asymmetric unit.
10748207	An open conformation of switch I revealed by the crystal structure of a Mg2+-free form of RHOA complexed with GDP. Implications for the GDP/GTP exchange mechanism.	Mg(2+) ions are essential for guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity and play key roles in guanine nucleotide binding and preserving the structural integrity of GTP-binding proteins. We determined the crystal structure of a small GTPase RHOA complexed with GDP in the absence of Mg(2+) at 2.0-A resolution. Elimination of a Mg(2+) ion induces significant conformational changes in the switch I region that opens up the nucleotide-binding site. Similar structural changes have been observed in the switch regions of Ha-Ras bound to its guanine nucleotide exchange factor, Sos. This RHOA-GDP structure reveals an important regulatory role for Mg(2+) and suggests that guanine nucleotide exchange factor may utilize this feature of switch I to produce an open conformation in GDP/GTP exchange.
2835768	Structural analysis of a series of antiviral agents complexed with human rhinovirus 14.	The binding to human rhinovirus 14 of a series of eight antiviral agents that inhibit picornaviral uncoating after entry into host cells has been characterized crystallographically. All of these bind into the same hydrophobic pocket within the viral protein VP1 beta-barrel structure, although the orientation and position of each compound within the pocket was found to differ. The compounds cause the protein shell to be less flexible, thereby inhibiting disassembly. Although the antiviral potency of these compounds varies by 120-fold, they all induce the same conformational changes on the virion. The interactions of these compounds with the viral capsid are consistent with their observed antiviral activities against human rhinovirus 14 drug-resistant mutants and other rhinovirus serotypes. Crystallographic studies of one of these mutants confirm the partial sequencing data and support the finding that this is a single mutation that occurs within the binding pocket.
16060669	Influence of the dimer interface on glutathione transferase structure and dynamics revealed by amide H/D exchange mass spectrometry.	Mammalian glutathione (GSH) transferases are dimeric proteins, many of which share a common hydrophobic interaction motif that is important for dimer stability. In the rGSTM1-1 enzyme this motif involves the side chain of F56, located on the 56 loop of the N-terminal domain, which is intercalated between the alpha4- and alpha5-helices of the C-terminal domain of the opposing subnuit. Disruption of the complementary interactions in this motif by mutation of F56 to serine, arginine, or glutamate is known to have deleterious effects on catalytic efficiency but remarkably different effects on the stability of the dimer [Hornby et al. (2002) Biochemistry 41, 14238-14247]. The structural basis for the behavior of the mutants by amide H/D exchange mass spectrometry is described. A substantial decrease in H/D exchange is observed in the GSH binding domain and in parts of the dimer interface upon substrate binding. The F56S and F56R mutants exhibit enhanced H/D exchange kinetics in the GSH binding domain and at the dimer interface. In contrast, the F56E mutant shows a decrease in the rate and extent of amide H/D exchange at the dimer interface and enhanced exchange kinetics in the GSH binding domain. The results suggest that the F56E mutant has a restructured dimer interface with decreased solvent accessibility and dynamics. Although all of the F56 mutations disrupt the GSH binding site, the effects of the mutations on the structure of the subunit interface and dimer stability are quite distinct.
9000632	Crystal structures of 8-Cl and 9-Cl TIBO complexed with wild-type HIV-1 RT and 8-Cl TIBO complexed with the Tyr181Cys HIV-1 RT drug-resistant mutant.	Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) is an important target for chemotherapeutic agents used in the treatment of AIDS; the TIBO compounds are potent non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 RT (NNRTIs). Crystal structures of HIV-1 RT complexed with 8-Cl TIBO (R86183, IC50 = 4.6 nM) and 9-Cl TIBO (R82913, IC50 = 33 nM) have been determined at 3.0 A resolution. Mutant HIV-1 RT, containing Cys in place of Tyr at position 181 (Tyrl81Cys), is highly resistant to many NNRTIs and HIV-1 variants containing this mutation have been selected in both cell culture and clinical trials. We also report the crystal structure of Tyrl81Cys HIV-1 RT in complex with 8-Cl TIBO (IC50 = 130 nM) determined at 3.2 A resolution. Averaging of the electron density maps computed for different HIV-1 RT/NNRTI complexes and from diffraction datasets obtained using a synchrotron source from frozen (-165 degrees C) and cooled (-10 degrees C) crystals of the same complex was employed to improve the quality of electron density maps and to reduce model bias. The overall locations and conformations of the bound inhibitors in the complexes containing wild-type HIV-1 RT and the two TIBO inhibitors are very similar, as are the overall shapes and volumes of the non-nucleoside inhibitor-binding pocket (NNIBP). The major differences between the two wild-type HIV-1 RT/TIBO complexes occur in the vicinity of the TIBO chlorine substituents and involve the polypeptide segments around the beta5-beta6 connecting loop (residues 95 to 105) and the beta13-beta14 hairpin (residues 235 and 236). In all known structures of HIV-1 RT/NNRTI complexes, including these two, the position of the beta12-beta13 hairpin or the "primer grip" is significantly displaced relative to the position in the structure of HIV-1 RT complexed with a double-stranded DNA and in unliganded HIV-1 RT structures. Since the primer grip helps to position the template-primer, this displacement suggests that binding of NNRTIs would affect the relative positions of the primer terminus and the polymerase active site. This could explain biochemical data showing that NNRTI binding to HIV-1 RT reduces efficiency of the chemical step of DNA polymerization, but does not prevent binding of either dNTPs or DNA. When the structure of the Tyr181Cys mutant HIV-1 RT in complex with 8-Cl TIBO is compared with the corresponding structure containing wild-type HIV-1 RT, the overall conformations of Tyr181Cys and wild-type HIV-1 RT and of the 8-Cl TIBO inhibitors are very similar. Some positional changes in the polypeptide backbone of the beta6-beta10-beta9 sheet containing residue 181 are observed when the Tyr181Cys and wild-type complexes are compared, particularlty near residue Val179 of beta9. In the p51 subunit, the Cys181 side-chain is oriented in a similar direction to the Tyr181 side-chain in the wild-type complex. However, the electron density corresponding to the sulfur of the Cys181 side-chain in the p66 subunit is very weak, indicating that the thiol group is disordered, presumably because there is no significant interaction with either 8-Cl TIBO or nearby amino acid residues. In the mutant complex, there are slight rearrangements of the side-chains of other amino acid residues in the NNIBP and of the flexible dimethylallyl group of 8-Cl TIBO; these conformational changes could potentially compensate for the interactions that were lost when the relatively large tyrosine at position 181 was replaced by a less bulky cysteine residue. In the corresponding wild-type complex, Tyr181 iin the p66 subunit has significant interactions with the bound inhibitor and the position of the Tyr181 side-chain is well defined in both subunits. Apparently the Tyr181 --> Cys mutation eliminates favorable contacts of the aromatic ring of the tyrosine and the bou
12379842	Core mutations switch monomeric protein GB1 into an intertwined tetramer.	The structure of a mutant immunoglobulin-binding B1 domain of streptococcal protein G (GB1), which comprises five conservative changes in hydrophobic core residues, was determined by NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. The oligomeric state and quaternary structure of the mutant protein are drastically changed from the wild type protein. The mutant structure consists of a symmetric tetramer, with intermolecular strand exchange involving all four units. Four of the five secondary structure elements present in the monomeric wild type GB1 structure are retained in the tetrameric structure, although their intra- and intermolecular interactions are altered. Our results demonstrate that through the acquisition of a moderate number of pivotal point mutations, proteins such as GB1 are able to undergo drastic structural changes, overcoming reduced stability of the monomeric unit by multimerization. The present structure is an illustrative example of how proteins exploit the breadth of conformational space.
11254385	Structure and functionality of a designed p53 dimer.	P53 is a homotetrameric tumor suppressor protein involved in transcriptional control of genes that regulate cell proliferation and death. In order to probe the role that oligomerization plays in this capacity, we have previously designed and characterized a series of p53 proteins with altered oligomeric states through hydrophilc substitution of residues Met340 or Leu344 in the normally tetrameric oligomerization domain. Although such mutations have little effect on the overall secondary structural content of the oligomerization domain, both solubility and the resistance to thermal denaturation are substantially reduced relative to that of the wild-type domain. Here, we report the design and characterization of a double-mutant p53 with alterations of residues at positions Met340 and Leu344. The double-mutations Met340Glu/Leu344Lys and Met340Gln/Leu344Arg resulted in distinct dimeric forms of the protein. Furthermore, we have verified by NMR structure determination that the double-mutant Met340Gln/Leu344Arg is essentially a "half-tetramer". Analysis of the in vivo activities of full-length p53 oligomeric mutants reveals that while cell-cycle arrest requires tetrameric p53, transcriptional transactivation activity of monomers and dimers retain roughly background and half of the wild-type activity, respectively.
9398521	Contribution of water molecules in the interior of a protein to the conformational stability.	Water molecules frequently occur in the interior of globular proteins. To elucidate the contribution of buried water molecules to the conformational stability of a protein, we examined the crystal structures and the thermodynamic parameters of denaturation of six Ile to Ala/Gly mutant human lysozymes, in which a cavity is created at each mutation site by the substitution of a smaller side-chain for a larger one. One or two ordered water molecules were found in the cavities created in some mutants (I106A, I59A and I59G). The cavity volumes for these three mutants were bigger than those that remained empty in the other mutants. The stability of the mutant proteins with the newly introduced water molecules was about 8 kJ/mol higher than that expected from the change in hydrophobic surface area (DeltaDeltaASAHP) exposed upon denaturation. It was concluded that a water molecule in a cavity created in the interior of a protein contributes favorably to the stability.
12065401	Crystal structure of auxin-binding protein 1 in complex with auxin.	The structure of auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1) from maize has been determined at 1.9 A resolution, revealing its auxin-binding site. The structure confirms that ABP1 belongs to the ancient and functionally diverse germin/seed storage 7S protein superfamily. The binding pocket of ABP1 is predominantly hydrophobic with a metal ion deep inside the pocket coordinated by three histidines and a glutamate. Auxin binds within this pocket, with its carboxylate binding the zinc and its aromatic ring binding hydrophobic residues including Trp151. There is a single disulfide between Cys2 and Cys155. No conformational rearrangement of ABP1 was observed when auxin bound to the protein in the crystal, but examination of the structure reveals a possible mechanism of signal transduction.
11054289	Structures of l-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase mutants outlining motions during catalysis.	The crystal structures of l-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase (FucA) with and without a ligated analogue of dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and of a number of active center mutants have resulted in a model of the catalytic mechanism. This model has now been confirmed by structural analyses of further mutations at the zinc coordination sphere and at the phosphate site. In addition, these mutants have revealed new aspects of the catalysis: the hydroxyl group of Tyr113' (from a neighboring subunit), which sits just outside the zinc coordination sphere, steers DHAP towards a productive binding mode at the zinc ion; Glu73 contacts zinc in between the two ligand positions intended for the DHAP oxygen atoms and thus avoids blocking of these positions by a tetrahedrally coordinated hydroxy ion; the FucA polypeptide does not assume its minimum energy state but oscillates between two states of elevated energy as demonstrated by a mutant in a minimum energy state. The back and forth motion involves a mobile loop connecting the phosphate site with intersubunit motions and thus with the Brownian motion of the solvent. The phosphate group is bound strongly at a given distance to the zinc ion, which prevents the formation of too tight a DHAP:zinc complex. This observation explains our failure to find mutants that accept phosphate-free substitutes for DHAP. The FucA zinc coordination sphere is compared with that of carbonic anhydrase.
1992356	Solving the structure of human H ferritin by genetically engineering intermolecular crystal contacts.	Ferritin is important in iron homeostasis. Its twenty-four chains of two types, H and L, assemble as a hollow shell providing an iron-storage cavity. Ferritin molecules in cells containing high levels of iron tend to be rich in L chains, and may have a long-term storage function, whereas H-rich ferritins are more active in iron metabolism. The molecular basis for the greater activity of H-rich ferritins has until now been obscure, largely because the structure of H-chain ferritin has remained unknown owing to the difficulties in obtaining crystals ordered enough for X-ray crystallographic analysis. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of a human ferritin H-chain homopolymer. By genetically engineering a change in the sequence of the intermolecular contact region, we obtained crystals isomorphous with the homologous rat L ferritin and of high enough quality for X-ray diffraction analysis. The X-ray structure of human H ferritin shows a novel metal site embedded within each of its four-helix bundles and we suggest that ferroxidase activity associated with this site accounts for its rapid uptake of iron.
8072533	Crystal structure of an isoleucine-zipper trimer.	Subunit oligomerization in many proteins is mediated by short coiled-coil motifs. These motifs share a characteristic seven-amino-acid repeat containing hydrophobic residues at the first (a) and fourth (d) positions. Despite this common pattern, different sequences form two-, three- and four-stranded helical ropes. We have investigated the basis for oligomer choice by characterizing variants of the GCN4 leucine-zipper dimerization domain that adopt trimeric or tetrameric structures in response to mutations at the a and d positions. We now report the high-resolution X-ray crystal structure of an isoleucine-containing mutant that folds into a parallel three-stranded, alpha-helical coiled coil. In contrast to the dimer and tetramer structures, the interior packing of the trimer can accommodate beta-branched residues in the most preferred rotamer at both hydrophobic positions. Compatibility of the shape of the core amino acids with the distinct packing spaces in the two-, three- and four-stranded conformations appears to determine the oligomerization state of the GCN4 leucine-zipper variants.
11752789	Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of five crystal forms of Escherichia coli L-asparaginase II (Asp90Glu mutant).	L-Asparaginase II from Escherichia coli with an Asp90Glu mutation in the active site has been crystallized in five polymorphic forms. Crystals of all polymorphs suitable for X-ray diffraction experiments were obtained by the vapour-diffusion method. Crystals of form I belong to the monoclinic system (space group C2), have unit-cell parameters a = 73.1, b = 133.1, c = 62.6 A, beta = 108.8 degrees and diffract to 2.27 A resolution. Three of the crystal forms are orthorhombic, with unit-cell parameters a = 225.4, b = 128.0, c = 62.6 A (form II, P2(1)2(1)2), a = 59.9, b = 71.2, c = 130.6 A (form III, primitive cell) and a = 73.8, b = 122.1, c = 124.2 A (form IV, P2(1)2(1)2(1) or P2(1)2(1)2); the crystals diffract to 2.33, 3.5 and 1.7 A, respectively. Polymorph V is trigonal, space group P3(1)21, with unit-cell parameters a = 123.1, c = 83.8 A; the crystals diffract to 2.65 A resolution.
15567410	Structural analysis of the group II intron splicing factor CRS2 yields insights into its protein and RNA interaction surfaces.	Chloroplast RNA splicing 2 (CRS2) is a nuclear-encoded protein required for the splicing of nine group II introns in maize chloroplasts. CRS2 functions in the context of splicing complexes that include one of two CRS2-associated factors (CAF1 and CAF2). The CRS2-CAF1 and CRS2-CAF2 complexes are required for the splicing of different subsets of CRS2-dependent introns, and they bind tightly and specifically to their genetically defined intron targets in vivo. The CRS2 amino acid sequence is closely related to those of bacterial peptidyl-tRNA hydrolases (PTHs). To identify the structural differences between CRS2 and bacterial PTHs responsible for CRS2's gains of CAF binding and intron splicing functions, we determined the structure of CRS2 by X-ray crystallography. The fold of CRS2 is the same as that of Escherichia coli PTH, but CRS2 has two surfaces that differ from the corresponding surfaces in PTH. One of these is more hydrophobic in CRS2 than in PTH. Site-directed mutagenesis of this surface blocked CRS2-CAF complex formation, indicating that it is the CAF binding site. The CRS2 surface corresponding to the putative tRNA binding face of PTH is considerably more basic than in PTH, suggesting that CRS2 interacts with group II intron substrates via this surface. Both the sequence and the structural context of the amino acid residues essential for peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase activity are conserved in CRS2, yet expression of CRS2 is incapable of rescuing a pth(ts)E.coli strain.
11927566	The large subunit of initiation factor aIF2 is a close structural homologue of elongation factors.	The heterotrimeric factor e/aIF2 plays a central role in eukaryotic/archaeal initiation of translation. By delivering the initiator methionyl-tRNA to the ribosome, e/aIF2 ensures specificity of initiation codon selection. The three subunits of aIF2 from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus abyssi could be overproduced in Escherichia coli. The beta and gamma subunits each contain a tightly bound zinc. The large gamma subunit is shown to form the structural core for trimer assembly. The crystal structures of aIF2gamma, free or complexed to GDP-Mg(2+) or GDPNP-Mg(2+), were resolved at resolutions better than 2 A. aIF2gamma displays marked similarities to elongation factors. A distinctive feature of e/aIF2gamma is a subdomain containing a zinc-binding knuckle. Examination of the nucleotide-complexed aIF2gamma structures suggests mechanisms of action and tRNA binding properties similar to those of an elongation factor. Implications for the mechanism of translation initiation in both eukarya and archaea are discussed. In particular, positioning of the initiator tRNA in the ribosomal A site during the search for the initiation codon is envisaged.
9837995	NMR solution structures of [d(GCGAAT-3'-3'-alphaT-5'-5'-CGC)2] and its unmodified control.	We present the high-resolution solution structures of a self-complementary DNA decamer duplex featuring a single alpha-anomeric nucleotide per strand encompassed by a set of 3'-3' and 5'-5' phosphodiester linkages, d(GCGAAT-3'-3'-alphaT-5'-5'-CGC)2, alphaT, and its unmodified control, d(GCGAATTCGC)2, obtained by restrained molecular dynamics. Interproton distance and deoxyribose ring torsion angle restraints were deduced from homonuclear NOESY and DQF-COSY data, respectively. For both the control and alphaT duplexes, excellent global convergence was observed from two different (A- and B-) starting models. The final average structures of the two duplexes are highly homologous, and overall possess the traits characteristic of right-handed B-DNA duplexes. However, localized differences between the two structures stem from the enhanced conformational exchange in the deoxyribose ring of the cytidine following the 5'-5' linkage, the C3'- exo pseudorotation phase angle of the alpha-nucleotide, and unusual backbone torsions in the 3'-3' and 5'-5' phosphodiester linkages. The structural data reported here are relevant to the design of antisense therapeutics comprised of these modifications.
10737931	Plasticity and steric strain in a parallel beta-helix: rational mutations in the P22 tailspike protein.	By means of genetic screens, a great number of mutations that affect the folding and stability of the tailspike protein from Salmonella phage P22 have been identified. Temperature-sensitive folding (tsf) mutations decrease folding yields at high temperature, but hardly affect thermal stability of the native trimeric structure when assembled at low temperature. Global suppressor (su) mutations mitigate this phenotype. Virtually all of these mutations are located in the central domain of tailspike, a large parallel beta-helix. We modified tailspike by rational single amino acid replacements at three sites in order to investigate the influence of mutations of two types: (1) mutations expected to cause a tsf phenotype by increasing the side-chain volume of a core residue, and (2) mutations in a similar structural context as two of the four known su mutations, which have been suggested to stabilize folding intermediates and the native structure by the release of backbone strain, an effect well known for residues that are primarily evolved for function and not for stability or folding of the protein. Analysis of folding yields, refolding kinetics and thermal denaturation kinetics in vitro show that the tsf phenotype can indeed be produced rationally by increasing the volume of side chains in the beta-helix core. The high-resolution crystal structure of mutant T326F proves that structural rearrangements only take place in the remarkably plastic lumen of the beta-helix, leaving the arrangement of the hydrogen-bonded backbone and thus the surface of the protein unaffected. This supports the notion that changes in the stability of an intermediate, in which the beta-helix domain is largely formed, are the essential mechanism by which tsf mutations affect tailspike folding. A rational design of su mutants, on the other hand, appears to be more difficult. The exchange of two residues in the active site expected to lead to a drastic release of steric strain neither enhanced the folding properties nor the stability of tailspike. Apparently, side-chain interactions in these cases overcompensate for backbone strain, illustrating the extreme optimization of the tailspike protein for conformational stability. The result exemplifies the view arising from the statistical analysis of the distribution of backbone dihedral angles in known three-dimensional protein structures that the adoption of straight phi/psi angles other than the most favorable ones is often caused by side-chain interactions. Proteins 2000;39:89-101.
15273307	Solution structure of the RWD domain of the mouse GCN2 protein.	GCN2 is the alpha-subunit of the only translation initiation factor (eIF2alpha) kinase that appears in all eukaryotes. Its function requires an interaction with GCN1 via the domain at its N-terminus, which is termed the RWD domain after three major RWD-containing proteins: RING finger-containing proteins, WD-repeat-containing proteins, and yeast DEAD (DEXD)-like helicases. In this study, we determined the solution structure of the mouse GCN2 RWD domain using NMR spectroscopy. The structure forms an alpha + beta sandwich fold consisting of two layers: a four-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet, and three side-by-side alpha-helices, with an alphabetabetabetabetaalphaalpha topology. A characteristic YPXXXP motif, which always occurs in RWD domains, forms a stable loop including three consecutive beta-turns that overlap with each other by two residues (triple beta-turn). As putative binding sites with GCN1, a structure-based alignment allowed the identification of several surface residues in alpha-helix 3 that are characteristic of the GCN2 RWD domains. Despite the apparent absence of sequence similarity, the RWD structure significantly resembles that of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2s), with most of the structural differences in the region connecting beta-strand 4 and alpha-helix 3. The structural architecture, including the triple beta-turn, is fundamentally common among various RWD domains and E2s, but most of the surface residues on the structure vary. Thus, it appears that the RWD domain is a novel structural domain for protein-binding that plays specific roles in individual RWD-containing proteins.
9811833	A streptavidin mutant with altered ligand-binding specificity.	The biotin-binding site of streptavidin was modified to alter its ligand-binding specificity. In natural streptavidin, the side chains of N23 and S27 make two of the three hydrogen bonds with the ureido oxygen of biotin. These two residues were mutated to severely weaken biotin binding while attempting to maintain the affinity for two biotin analogs, 2-iminobiotin and diaminobiotin. Redesigning of the biotin-binding site used the difference in local electrostatic charge distribution between biotin and these biotin analogs. Free energy calculations predicted that the introduction of a negative charge at the position of S27 plus the mutation N23A should disrupt two of the three hydrogen bonds between natural streptavidin and the ureido oxygen of biotin. In contrast, the imino hydrogen of 2-iminobiotin should form a hydrogen bond with the side chain of an acidic amino acid at position 27. This should reduce the biotin-binding affinity by approximately eight orders of magnitude, while leaving the affinities for these biotin analogs virtually unaffected. In good agreement with these predictions, a streptavidin mutant with the N23A and S27D substitutions binds 2-iminobiotin with an affinity (Ka) of 1 x 10(6) M-1, two orders of magnitude higher than that for biotin (1 x 10(4) M-1). In contrast, the binding affinity of this streptavidin mutant for diaminobiotin (2.7 x 10(4) M-1) was lower than predicted (2.9 x 10(5) M-1), suggesting the position of the diaminobiotin in the biotin-binding site was not accurately determined by modeling.
8355275	Refined X-ray structures of haloalkane dehalogenase at pH 6.2 and pH 8.2 and implications for the reaction mechanism.	The crystal structure of haloalkane dehalogenase from Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10 has been refined at 1.9 A resolution at two different pH values, the pH of crystallization (pH 6.2) and the pH of optimal activity (pH 8.2), to final R-factors of 16.8% and 16.4%, respectively. Both models show good stereochemical quality. Two non-glycine residues have main-chain torsion angles that are located outside the "allowed" regions in a Ramachandran plot. One of them is the nucleophilic residue Asp124, which, together with the two other active site residues His289 and Asp260, is situated in an internal, predominantly hydrophobic cavity. The other residue, Asn148, helps stabilize the conformations of two of these active-site residues, Asp124 and Asp260. Comparison of the models at pH 6.2 and pH 8.2 revealed one major structural difference. At pH 6.2, a salt-bridge is present between the N epsilon 2 atom of His289 and the O delta 1 atom of Asp124, while at pH 8.2, this salt-bridge is absent, indicating that the N epsilon 2 atom of the histidine residue is mostly deprotonated at the pH of optimum activity. This is in agreement with the putative reaction mechanism in which the O delta 1 atom of Asp124 performs a nucleophilic attack on the substrate, resulting in an intermediate ester. This ester is subsequently cleaved by a hydrolytic water molecule. The high-resolution data sets clearly show the exact position of this water molecule. It is in an ideal position for donating a proton to the N epsilon 2 atom of His289 and subsequently cleaving the covalently bound intermediate ester, releasing the alcohol product. Detailed investigation of both refined models showed a number of unusual structural features. Four out of 11 helices contain an internal proline residue other than in the first turn. Two other alpha-helices have adopted in their central part a 3(10) conformation. A novel four-residue turn between a helix and a strand, the alpha beta 4 turn, is located at the site of the bend in the central eight-stranded beta-sheet of the dehalogenase structure.
12962479	Structure and catalytic mechanism of L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase.	The structure of L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase has been established at 1.35 A resolution in a crystal form that was obtained by a surface mutation and has one subunit of the C(4)-symmetric tetramer in the asymmetric unit. It confirms an earlier 2.7 A resolution structure which was determined in a complicated crystal form with 20 subunits per asymmetric unit. The chain fold and the active center are similar to those of L-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase and L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase. The active center similarity is supported by a structural comparison of all three enzymes and by the binding mode of the inhibitor phosphoglycolohydroxamate at the site of the product dihydroxyacetone phosphate for the two aldolases. The sensitivity of the catalytic rate to several mutations and a comparison with the established mechanism of the related aldolase give rise to a putative catalytic mechanism. This mechanism involves the same binding mode of the second product L-lactaldehyde in both aldolases, except for a 180 degrees flip of the aldehyde group distinguishing between the two epimers rhamnulose and fuculose. The N-terminal domain exhibits a correlated anisotropic mobility that channels the isotropic Brownian motion into a directed movement of the catalytic base and the substrate phosphate on the N-domain toward the zinc ion and the lactaldehyde on the C-terminal domain. We suggest that this movement supports the catalysis mechanically.
11513591	Hydrophobic core manipulations in ribonuclease T1.	Differential scanning calorimetry, urea denaturation, and X-ray crystallography were combined to study the structural and energetic consequences of refilling an engineered cavity in the hydrophobic core of RNase T1 with CH(3), SH, and OH groups. Three valines that cluster together in the major hydrophobic core of T1 were each replaced with Ala, Ser, Thr, and Cys. Compared to the wild-type protein, all these mutants reduce the thermodynamic stability of the enzyme considerably. The relative order of stability at all three positions is as follows: Val > Ala approximately equal to Thr > Ser. The effect of introducing a sulfhydryl group is more variable. Surprisingly, a Val --> Cys mutation in a hydrophobic environment can be as or even more destabilizing than a Val --> Ser mutation. Furthermore, our results reveal that the penalty for introducing an OH group into a hydrophobic cavity is roughly the same as the gain obtained from filling the cavity with a CH(3) group. The inverse equivalence of the behavior of hydroxyl and methyl groups seems to be crucial for the unique three-dimensional structure of the proteins. The importance of negative design elements in this context is highlighted.
12499545	The refined atomic structure of carbonic anhydrase II at 1.05 A resolution: implications of chemical rescue of proton transfer.	Using synchrotron radiation and a CCD detector, X-ray data have been collected at 100 K for the His64Ala mutant of human carbonic anhydrase II complexed with 4-methylimidazole (4-MI) to a maximal 1.05 A resolution, allowing full anisotropic least-squares refinement. The refined model has a conventional R factor of 15.7% for all reflections. The C(alpha) coordinates of the model presented here have an r.m.s. deviation of 0.10 A relative to the previously determined structure at 1.6 A resolution. Several amino-acid residues (six of the 255 observed) have been identified with multiple rotamer side-chain conformations. C, N and O atoms can be differentiated with selective electron-density map contouring. The estimated standard deviations for all main-chain non-H atom bond lengths and angles are 0.013 and 0.030 A, respectively, based on unrestrained full-matrix least-squares refinement. This structure gives detailed information about the tetrahedrally arranged zinc ion coordinated by three histidine N atoms (His94 N(epsilon 2), His96 N(epsilon2) and His119 N(delta1)) and a water/hydroxide, the multiple binding sites of the proton chemical rescue molecule 4-MI and the solvent networks linking the zinc-bound water/hydroxide and 4-MI molecules. This structure presents the highest resolution structure of a carbonic anhydrase isozyme so far determined and adds to the understanding of proton-transfer processes.
16364919	The role of docking interactions in mediating signaling input, output, and discrimination in the yeast MAPK network.	Cells use a network of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) to coordinate responses to diverse extracellular signals. Here, we examine the role of docking interactions in determining connectivity of the yeast MAPKs Fus3 and Kss1. These closely related kinases are activated by the common upstream MAPK kinase Ste7 yet generate distinct output responses, mating and filamentous growth, respectively. We find that docking interactions are necessary for communication with the kinases and that they can encode subtle differences in pathway-specific input and output. The cell cycle arrest mediator Far1, a mating-specific substrate, has a docking motif that selectively binds Fus3. In contrast, the shared partner Ste7 has a promiscuous motif that binds both Fus3 and Kss1. Structural analysis reveals that Fus3 interacts with specific and promiscuous peptides in conformationally distinct modes. Induced fit recognition may allow docking peptides to achieve discrimination by exploiting subtle differences in kinase flexibility.
11856322	Engineering of a monomeric and low-glycosylated form of human butyrylcholinesterase: expression, purification, characterization and crystallization.	Human butyrylcholinesterase (BChE; EC 3.1.1.8) is of particular interest because it hydrolyzes or scavenges a wide range of toxic compounds including cocaine, organophosphorus pesticides and nerve agents. The relative contribution of each N-linked glycan for the solubility, the stability and the secretion of the enzyme was investigated. A recombinant monomeric BChE lacking four out of nine N-glycosylation sites and the C-terminal oligomerization domain was stably expressed as a monomer in CHO cells. The purified recombinant BChE showed catalytic properties similar to those of the native enzyme. Tetragonal crystals suitable for X-ray crystallography studies were obtained; they were improved by recrystallization and found to diffract to 2.0 A resolution using synchrotron radiation. The crystals belong to the tetragonal space group I422 with unit cell dimensions a = b = 154.7 A, c = 124.9 A, giving a Vm of 2.73 A3 per Da (estimated 60% solvent) for a single molecule of recombinant BChE in the asymmetric unit. The crystal structure of butyrylcholinesterase will help elucidate unsolved issues concerning cholinesterase mechanisms in general.
9041653	Importance of van der Waals contact between Glu 35 and Trp 109 to the catalytic action of human lysozyme.	The importance of van der Waals contact between Glu 35 and Trp 109 to the active-site structure and the catalytic properties of human lysozyme (HL) has been investigated by site-directed mutagenesis. The X-ray analysis of mutant HLs revealed that both the replacement of Glu 35 by Asp or Ala, and the replacement of Trp 109 by Phe or Ala resulted in a significant but localized change in the active-site cleft geometry. A prominent movement of the backbone structure was detected in the region of residues 110 to 120 and in the region of residues 100 to 115 for the mutations concerning Glu 35 and Trp 109, respectively. Accompanied by the displacement of the main-chain atoms with a maximal deviation of C alpha atom position ranging from 0.7 A to 1.0 A, the mutant HLs showed a remarkable change in the catalytic properties against Micrococcus luteus cell substrate as compared with native HL. Although the replacement of Glu 35 by Ala completely abolished the lytic activity, HL-Asp 35 mutant retained a weak but a certain lytic activity, showing the possible involvement of the side-chain carboxylate group of Asp 35 in the catalytic action. The kinetic consequence derived from the replacement of Trp 109 by Phe or Ala together with the result of the structural change suggested that the structural detail of the cleft lobe composed of the residues 100 to 115 centered at Ala 108 was responsible for the turnover in the reaction of HL against the bacterial cell wall substrate. The results revealed that the van der Waals contact between Glu 35 and Trp 109 was an essential determinant in the catalytic action of HL.
11336709	Crystal structure at 2.8 A of an FcRn/heterodimeric Fc complex: mechanism of pH-dependent binding.	The neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) transports immunoglobulin G (IgG) across epithelia, binding IgG in acidic vesicles (pH < or = 6.5) and releasing IgG in the blood at pH 7.4. Well-ordered FcRn/Fc crystals are prevented by the formation of "oligomeric ribbons" of FcRn dimers bridged by Fc homodimers, thus we crystallized a 1:1 complex between rat FcRn and a heterodimeric Fc containing only one FcRn binding site. The 2.8 A complex structure demonstrates that FcRn uses its alpha2 and beta2-microglobulin domains and carbohydrate to interact with the Fc C(gamma)2-C(gamma)3 interface. The structure reveals conformational changes in Fc and three titratable salt bridges that confer pH-dependent binding, and can be used to guide rational design of therapeutic IgGs with longer serum half-lives.
15049684	Crystal structures of an intrinsically active cholera toxin mutant yield insight into the toxin activation mechanism.	Cholera toxin (CT) is a heterohexameric bacterial protein toxin belonging to a larger family of A/B ADP-ribosylating toxins. Each of these toxins undergoes limited proteolysis and/or disulfide bond reduction to form the enzymatically active toxic fragment. Nicking and reduction render both CT and the closely related heat-labile enterotoxin from Escherichia coli (LT) unstable in solution, thus far preventing a full structural understanding of the conformational changes resulting from toxin activation. We present the first structural glimpse of an active CT in structures from three crystal forms of a single-site A-subunit CT variant, Y30S, which requires no activational modifications for full activity. We also redetermined the structure of the wild-type, proenzyme CT from two crystal forms, both of which exhibit (i) better geometry and (ii) a different A2 "tail" conformation than the previously determined structure [Zhang et al. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 251, 563-573]. Differences between wild-type CT and active CTY30S are observed in A-subunit loop regions that had been previously implicated in activation by analysis of the structure of an LT A-subunit R7K variant [van den Akker et al. (1995) Biochemistry 34, 10996-11004]. The 25-36 activation loop is disordered in CTY30S, while the 47-56 active site loop displays varying degrees of order in the three CTY30S structures, suggesting that disorder in the activation loop predisposes the active site loop to a greater degree of flexibility than that found in unactivated wild-type CT. On the basis of these six new views of the CT holotoxin, we propose a model for how the activational modifications experienced by wild-type CT are communicated to the active site.
9755858	SKAP-HOM, a novel adaptor protein homologous to the FYN-associated protein SKAP55.	A recombinant GST-Fyn-SH2 domain was used to purify proteins from lysates of pervanadate treated EL4 cells. N-terminal sequencing and molecular cloning of one of the purified polypeptides resulted in the identification of a novel adaptor protein that shares strong structural homology to the recently cloned Fyn-associated adaptor protein SKAP55. This protein was termed SKAP-HOM (SKAP55 homologue). Despite their striking homology, SKAP55 and SKAP-HOM have distinct characteristics. Thus, unlike SKAP55, which is exclusively expressed in T lymphocytes, SKAP-HOM expression is ubiquitous. Furthermore, while SKAP55 is constitutively tyrosine phosphorylated in resting human T cells, SKAP-HOM is expressed as a non-phosphorylated protein in the absence of external stimulus but becomes phosphorylated following T cell activation. In addition, SKAP-HOM does not associate with p59fyn in T cells although it represents a specific substrate for the kinase in COS cells. Finally, we demonstrate that, as previously shown for SKAP55, SKAP-HOM interacts with the recently identified polypeptide SLAP-130.
10926520	Crystal structure of glycosyltrehalose trehalohydrolase from the hyperthermophilic archaeum Sulfolobus solfataricus.	The crystal structure of glycosyltrehalose trehalohydrolase from the hyperthermophilic archaeum Sulfolobus solfataricus KM1 has been solved by multiple isomorphous replacement. The enzyme is an alpha-amylase (family 13) with unique exo-amylolytic activity for glycosyltrehalosides. It cleaves the alpha-1,4 glycosidic bond adjacent to the trehalose moiety to release trehalose and maltooligo saccharide. Unlike most other family 13 glycosidases, the enzyme does not require Ca(2+) for activity, and it contains an N-terminal extension of approximately 100 amino acid residues that is homologous to N-terminal domains found in many glycosidases that recognize branched oligosaccharides. Crystallography revealed the enzyme to exist as a homodimer covalently linked by an intermolecular disulfide bond at residue C298. The existence of the intermolecular disulfide bond was confirmed by biochemical analysis and mutagenesis. The N-terminal extension forms an independent domain connected to the catalytic domain by an extended linker. The functionally essential Ca(2+) binding site found in the B domain of alpha-amylases and many other family 13 glycosidases was found to be replaced by hydrophobic packing interactions. The enzyme also contains a very unusual excursion in the (beta/alpha)(8) barrel structure of the catalytic domain. This excursion originates from the bottom of the (beta/alpha)(8) barrel between helix 6 and strand 7, but folds upward in a distorted alpha-hairpin structure to form a part of the substrate binding cleft wall that is possibly critical for the enzyme's unique substrate selectivity. Participation of an alpha-beta loop in the formation of the substrate binding cleft is a novel feature that is not observed in other known (beta/alpha)(8) enzymes.
2548847	Structural factors that control conformational transitions and serotype specificity in type 3 poliovirus.	The three-dimensional structure of the Sabin strain of type 3 poliovirus has been determined at 2.4 A resolution. Significant structural differences with the Mahoney strain of type 1 poliovirus are confined to loops and terminal extensions of the capsid proteins, occur in all of the major antigenic sites of the virion and typically involve insertions, deletions or the replacement of prolines. Several newly identified components of the structure participate in assembly-dependent interactions which are relevant to the biologically important processes of viral assembly and uncoating. These include two sites of lipid substitution, two putative nucleotides and a beta sheet formed by the N-termini of capsid proteins VP4 and VP1. The structure provides an explanation for the temperature sensitive phenotype of the P3/Sabin strain. Amino acids that regulate temperature sensitivity in type 3 poliovirus are located in the interfaces between promoters, in the binding site for a lipid substituent and in an assembly-dependent extended beta sheet that stabilizes the association of pentamers. Several lines of evidence indicate that these structural components also control conformational transitions at various stages of the viral life cycle.
15201273	Structure--activity relationships of hainantoxin-IV and structure determination of active and inactive sodium channel blockers.	Hainantoxin-IV (HNTX-IV) can specifically inhibit the neuronal tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channels and defines a new class of depressant spider toxin. The sequence of native HNTX-IV is ECLGFGKGCNPSNDQCCKSSNLVCSRKHRWCKYEI-NH(2). In the present study, to obtain further insight into the primary and tertiary structural requirements of neuronal sodium channel blockers, we determined the solution structure of HNTX-IV as a typical inhibitor cystine knot motif and synthesized four mutants designed based on the predicted sites followed by structural elucidation of two inactive mutants. Pharmacological studies indicated that the S12A and R26A mutants had activities near that of native HNTX-IV, while K27A and R29A demonstrated activities reduced by 2 orders of magnitude. (1)H MR analysis showed the similar molecular conformations for native HNTX-IV and four synthetic mutants. Furthermore, in the determined structures of K27A and R29A, the side chains of residues 27 and 29 were located in the identical spatial position to those of native HNTX-IV. These results suggested that residues Ser(12), Arg(26), Lys(27), and Arg(29) were not responsible for stabilizing the distinct conformation of HNTX-IV, but Lys(27) and Arg(29) were critical for the bioactivities. The potency reductions produced by Ala substitutions were primarily due to the direct interaction of the essential residues Lys(27) and Arg(29) with sodium channels rather than to a conformational change. After comparison of these structures and activities with correlated toxins, we hypothesized that residues Lys(27), Arg(29), His(28), Lys(32), Phe(5), and Trp(30) clustered on one face of HNTX-IV were responsible for ligand binding.
11866509	Chiral mutagenesis of insulin's hidden receptor-binding surface: structure of an allo-isoleucine(A2) analogue.	The hydrophobic core of vertebrate insulins contains an invariant isoleucine residue at position A2. Lack of variation may reflect this side-chain's dual contribution to structure and function: Ile(A2) is proposed both to stabilize the A1-A8 alpha-helix and to contribute to a "hidden" functional surface exposed on receptor binding. Substitution of Ile(A2) by alanine results in segmental unfolding of the A1-A8 alpha-helix, lower thermodynamic stability and impaired receptor binding. Such a spectrum of perturbations, although of biophysical interest, confounds interpretation of structure-activity relationships. To investigate the specific contribution of Ile(A2) to insulin's functional surface, we have employed non-standard mutagenesis: inversion of side-chain chirality in engineered monomer allo-Ile(A2)-DKP-insulin. Although the analogue retains native structure and stability, its affinity for the insulin receptor is impaired by 50-fold. Thus, whereas insulin's core readily accommodates allo-isoleucine at A2, its activity is exquisitely sensitive to chiral inversion. We propose that the Ile(A2) side-chain inserts within a chiral pocket of the receptor as part of insulin's hidden functional surface.
11800562	Crystal structures of mutant forms of the Bacillus caldolyticus cold shock protein differing in thermal stability.	The cold shock proteins Bc-Csp from the thermophile Bacillus caldolyticus and Bs-CspB from the mesophile Bacillus subtilis differ significantly in their conformational stability, although the two proteins differ by only 12 out of 67 amino acid residues. The three-dimensional structure of these small and compact beta-barrel proteins without disulfide bonds, cis-proline residues or tightly bound cofactors is very similar. Previous work has shown that Bc-Csp displays a twofold increase in the free energy of stabilization relative to its homolog Bs-CspB, and indicated that electrostatic interactions are, in part, responsible for this effect. It was further described that the stability difference is almost exclusively due to surface-exposed charged residues at sequence positions 3 and 66 of Bc-Csp and Bs-CspB, whereas all other amino acid changes between both proteins have no net effect on stability. To investigate how two surface residues determine the stability of Bc-Csp, Arg3 and Leu66 were replaced by glutamic acid, corresponding to the Bs-CspB sequence. The crystal structures of the resultant protein variants, Bc-Csp R3E and Bc-Csp L66E, were determined at 1.4 A and 1.27 A resolution, and refined to R values of 13.9 % and 15.8 %, respectively. Both structures closely resemble Bc-Csp in their global fold and show different hydrogen bonding and salt-bridge patterns when two independent molecules in the asymmetric unit of the crystal are compared. To extend the study to neighbored residues that help determine the surface charge around Arg3 and Leu66, the mutant proteins Bc-Csp E46A, Bc-Csp R3E/E46A/L66E and Bc-Csp V64T/L66E/67A were crystallized. Their structures were determined at resolutions of 1.8 A, 1.32 A and 1.8 A and refined to R values of 18.5 %, 13.8 % and 19.3 %, respectively. A systematic comparison of the crystal structures of all forms of the B. caldolyticus cold shock protein shows varying patterns of hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions around residues 3 and 66. Thermal destabilization of the protein by mutation appears to correlate with the extent of an acidic surface patch near the C-terminal carboxylate group.
10545326	Metal-ion affinity and specificity in EF-hand proteins: coordination geometry and domain plasticity in parvalbumin.	BACKGROUND: The EF-hand family is a large set of Ca(2+)-binding proteins that contain characteristic helix-loop-helix binding motifs that are highly conserved in sequence. Members of this family include parvalbumin and many prominent regulatory proteins such as calmodulin and troponin C. EF-hand proteins are involved in a variety of physiological processes including cell-cycle regulation, second messenger production, muscle contraction, microtubule organization and vision. RESULTS: We have determined the structures of parvalbumin mutants designed to explore the role of the last coordinating residue of the Ca(2+)-binding loop. An E101D substitution has been made in the parvalbumin EF site. The substitution decreases the Ca(2+)-binding affinity 100-fold and increases the Mg(2+)-binding affinity 10-fold. Both the Ca(2+)- and Mg(2+)-bound structures have been determined, and a structural basis has been proposed for the metal-ion-binding properties. CONCLUSIONS: The E101D mutation does not affect the Mg(2+) coordination geometry of the binding loop, but it does pull the F helix 1.1 A towards the loop. The E101D-Ca(2+) structure reveals that this mutant cannot obtain the sevenfold coordination preferred by Ca(2+), presumably because of strain limits imposed by tertiary structure. Analysis of these results relative to previously reported structural information supports a model wherein the characteristics of the last coordinating residue and the plasticity of the Ca(2+)-binding loop delimit the allowable geometries for the coordinating sphere.
15610023	Toward the insulin-IGF-I intermediate structures: functional and structural properties of the [TyrB25NMePheB26] insulin mutant.	The origins of differentiation of insulin from insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) are still unknown. To address the problem of a structural and biological switch from the mostly metabolic hormonal activity of insulin to the predominant growth factor activities of IGF-I, an insulin analogue with IGF-I-like structural features has been synthesized. Insulin residues Phe(B25) and Tyr(B26) have been swapped with the IGF-I-like Tyr(24) and Phe(25) sequence with a simultaneous methylation of the peptide nitrogen of residue Phe(B26). These modifications were expected to introduce a substantial kink in the main chain, as observed at residue Phe(25) in the IGF-I crystal structure. These alterations should provide insight into the structural origins of insulin-IGF-I structural and functional divergence. The [Tyr(B25)NMePhe(B26)] mutant has been characterized, and its crystal structure has been determined. Surprisingly, all of these changes are well accommodated within an insulin R6 hexamer. Only one molecule of each dimer in the hexamer responds to the structural alterations, the other remaining very similar to wild-type insulin. All alterations, modest in their scale, cumulate in the C-terminal part of the B-chain (residues B23-B30), which moves toward the core of the insulin molecule and is associated with a significant shift of the A1 helix toward the C-terminus of the B-chain. These changes do not produce the expected bend of the main chain, but the fold of the mutant does reflect some structural characteristics of IGF-1, and in addition establishes the CO(A19)-NH(B25) hydrogen bond, which is normally characteristic of T-state insulin.
15128738	Atomic resolution structures and solution behavior of enzyme-substrate complexes of Enterobacter cloacae PB2 pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase. Multiple conformational states and implications for the mechanism of nitroaromatic explosive degradation.	The structure of pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) reductase in complex with the nitroaromatic substrate picric acid determined previously at 1.55 A resolution indicated additional electron density between the indole ring of residue Trp-102 and the nitro group at C-6 of picrate. The data suggested the presence of an unusual bond between substrate and the tryptophan side chain. Herein, we have extended the resolution of the PETN reductase-picric acid complex to 0.9 A. This high-resolution analysis indicates that the active site is partially occupied with picric acid and that the anomalous density seen in the original study is attributed to the population of multiple conformational states of Trp-102 and not a formal covalent bond between the indole ring of Trp-102 and picric acid. The significance of any interaction between Trp-102 and nitroaromatic substrates was probed further in solution and crystal complexes with wild-type and mutant (W102Y and W102F) enzymes. Unlike with wild-type enzyme, in the crystalline form picric acid was bound at full occupancy in the mutant enzymes, and there was no evidence for multiple conformations of active site residues. Solution studies indicate tighter binding of picric acid in the active sites of the W102Y and W102F enzymes. Mutation of Trp-102 does not impair significantly enzyme reduction by NADPH, but the kinetics of decay of the hydride-Meisenheimer complex are accelerated in the mutant enzymes. The data reveal that decay of the hydride-Meisenheimer complex is enzyme catalyzed and that the final distribution of reaction products for the mutant enzymes is substantially different from wild-type enzyme. Implications for the mechanism of high explosive degradation by PETN reductase are discussed.
10964705	Crystal structures of the ribonuclease MC1 from bitter gourd seeds, complexed with 2'-UMP or 3'-UMP, reveal structural basis for uridine specificity.	Ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1) isolated from seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) consists of 190 amino acids and is characterized by a preferential cleavage at the 5'-side of uridine. This uridine specificity distinguishes RNase MC1 from other enzymes belonging to the RNase T2 family. The three-dimensional structures of RNase MC1, in a complex with either 2'-UMP or 3'-UMP, were determined at 1.48 and 1.77 A resolutions, respectively. The side chains of Gln9 and Asn71 interact with O4 and N3, respectively, of the uracil base by hydrogen bondings. In addition, the uracil base is sandwiched by the hydrophobic side chains of Leu73 and Phe80. Compared with these amino acid residues and corresponding residues in RNases in the RNase T2 family, Gln9 and Phe80 are highly conserved in the RNases in T2 family, while Asn71 and Leu73 in RNase MC1 are variant in sequences. It is thus likely that interactions of the side chains of Asn71 and Leu73 with the uracil base are responsible for the absolute uridine specificity of RNase MC1. Site-directed mutagenesis experiments showed that replacement of Asn by Thr decreased both the catalytic efficiency and the binding affinity by 2.3- and 7.0-fold, respectively, and substitution of Leu73 for Ala predominantly decreased the binding affinity by 14. 5-fold, compared with findings in case of wild-type RNase MC1. It is thus demonstrated that Asn71 and Leu73 play an essential role in uridine preference for RNase MC1.
16229465	Crystal structure of Methanococcus voltae RadA in complex with ADP: hydrolysis-induced conformational change.	Members of a superfamily of RecA-like recombinases facilitate a central strand exchange reaction in the DNA repair process. Archaeal RadA and Rad51 and eukaryal Rad51 and meiosis-specific DMC1 form a closely related group of recombinases distinct from bacterial RecA. Nevertheless, all such recombinases share a conserved core domain which carries the ATPase site and putative DNA-binding sites. Here we present the crystal structure of an archaeal RadA from Methanococcus voltae (MvRadA) in complex with ADP and Mg2+ at 2.1 A resolution. The crystallized RadA-ADP filament has an extended helical pitch similar to those of previously determined structures in the presence of nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue AMP-PNP. Structural comparison reveals two recurrent conformations with an extensive allosteric effect spanning the ATPase site and the putative DNA-binding L2 region. Varied conformations of the L2 region also imply a dynamic nature of recombinase-bound DNA.
10490031	Structures of a histone deacetylase homologue bound to the TSA and SAHA inhibitors.	Histone deacetylases (HDACs) mediate changes in nucleosome conformation and are important in the regulation of gene expression. HDACs are involved in cell-cycle progression and differentiation, and their deregulation is associated with several cancers. HDAC inhibitors, such as trichostatin A (TSA) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), have anti-tumour effects, as they can inhibit cell growth, induce terminal differentiation and prevent the formation of tumours in mice models, and they are effective in the treatment of promyelocytic leukemia. Here we describe the structure of the histone deacetylase catalytic core, as revealed by the crystal structure of a homologue from the hyperthermophilic bacterium Aquifex aeolicus, that shares 35.2% identity with human HDAC1 over 375 residues, deacetylates histones in vitro and is inhibited by TSA and SAHA. The deacetylase, deacetylase-TSA and deacetylase-SAHA structures reveal an active site consisting of a tubular pocket, a zinc-binding site and two Asp-His charge-relay systems, and establish the mechanism of HDAC inhibition. The residues that make up the active site and contact the inhibitors are conserved across the HDAC family. These structures also suggest a mechanism for the deacetylation reaction and provide a framework for the further development of HDAC inhibitors as antitumour agents.
15272161	The role of substrate-binding groups in the mechanism of aspartate-beta-semialdehyde dehydrogenase.	The reversible dephosphorylation of beta-aspartyl phosphate to L-aspartate-beta-semialdehyde (ASA) in the aspartate biosynthetic pathway is catalyzed by aspartate-beta-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (ASADH). The product of this reaction is a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of diaminopimelic acid, an integral component of bacterial cell walls and a metabolic precursor of lysine and also a precursor in the biosynthesis of threonine, isoleucine and methionine. The structures of selected Haemophilus influenzae ASADH mutants were determined in order to evaluate the residues that are proposed to interact with the substrates ASA or phosphate. The substrate Km values are not altered by replacement of either an active-site arginine (Arg270) with a lysine or a putative phosphate-binding group (Lys246) with an arginine. However, the interaction of phosphate with the enzyme is adversely affected by replacement of Arg103 with lysine and is significantly altered when a neutral leucine is substituted at this position. A conservative Glu243 to aspartate mutant does not alter either ASA or phosphate binding, but instead results in an eightfold increase in the Km for the coenzyme NADP. Each of the mutations is shown to cause specific subtle active-site structural alterations and each of these changes results in decreases in catalytic efficiency ranging from significant (approximately 3% native activity) to substantial (<0.1% native activity).
12554829	Structure and allosteric regulation of the alpha X beta 2 integrin I domain.	The integrin alpha X beta 2 (CD11c/CD18, p150,95) binds ligands through the I domain of the alpha X subunit. Ligands include the complement factor fragment iC3b, a key component in the innate immune defense, which, together with the expression of alpha X beta 2 on dendritic cells and on other leukocytes, suggests a role in the immune response. We now report the structure of the alpha X I domain resolved at 1.65 A by x-ray crystallography. To analyze structural requirements for ligand binding we made a mutation in the alpha X I domain C-terminal helix, which increased the affinity for iC3b approximately 200-fold to 2.4 microM compared with the wild-type domain affinity of approximately 400 microM. Gel permeation chromatography supported a conformational change between the wild-type and mutated domains. Conservation of allosteric regulation in the alpha X I domain points to the functional importance of this phenomenon.
9032381	The refined crystal structure of the 3C gene product from hepatitis A virus: specific proteinase activity and RNA recognition.	The virally encoded 3C proteinases of picornaviruses process the polyprotein produced by the translation of polycistronic viral mRNA. The X-ray crystallographic structure of a catalytically active mutant of the hepatitis A virus (HAV) 3C proteinase (C24S) has been determined. Crystals of this mutant of HAV 3C are triclinic with unit cell dimensions a = 53.6 A, b = 53.5 A, c = 53.2 A, alpha = 99.1 degrees, beta = 129.0 degrees, and gamma = 103.3 degrees. There are two molecules of HAV 3C in the unit cell of this crystal form. The structure has been refined to an R factor of 0.211 (Rfree = 0.265) at 2.0-A resolution. Both molecules fold into the characteristic two-domain structure of the chymotrypsin-like serine proteinases. The active-site and substrate-binding regions are located in a surface groove between the two beta-barrel domains. The catalytic Cys 172 S(gamma) and His 44 N(epsilon2) are separated by 3.9 A; the oxyanion hole adopts the same conformation as that seen in the serine proteinases. The side chain of Asp 84, the residue expected to form the third member of the catalytic triad, is pointed away from the side chain of His 44 and is locked in an ion pair interaction with the epsilon-amino group of Lys 202. A water molecule is hydrogen bonded to His 44 N(delta1). The side-chain phenolic hydroxyl group of Tyr 143 is close to this water and to His 44 N(delta1) and may be negatively charged. The glutamine specificity for P1 residues of substrate cleavage sites is attributed to the presence of a highly conserved His 191 in the S1 pocket. A very unusual environment of two water molecules and a buried glutamate contribute to the imidazole tautomer believed to be important in the P1 specificity. HAV 3C proteinase has the conserved RNA recognition sequence KFRDI located in the interdomain connection loop on the side of the molecule diametrically opposite the proteolytic site. This segment of polypeptide is located between the N- and C-terminal helices, and its conformation results in the formation of a well-defined surface with a strongly charged electrostatic potential. Presumably, this surface of HAV 3C participates in the recognition of the 5' and 3' nontranslated regions of the RNA genome during viral replication.
15273277	Identification of important chemical groups of the hut mRNA for HutP interactions that regulate the hut operon in Bacillus subtilis.	HutP is an RNA binding protein that regulates the expression of the histidine utilization (hut) operon in Bacillus species by binding to cis-acting regulatory sequences on hut mRNA. We recently solved the HutP crystal structure, which revealed a novel fold where three dimers are arranged in a 3-fold axis to form the hexamer. We also identified a minimal RNA binding element sufficient for HutP binding: three UAG trinucleotide motifs, each separated by 4 nt, located just upstream of the terminator. In the present study we have identified important RNA chemical groups essential for HutP interactions, by combining an in vitro selection strategy and analyses by site-specific base substitutions. These analyses suggest that each HutP molecule recognizes one UAG motif, where the first base (U) can be substituted with other bases, while the second and third bases (A and G) are required for the interactions. Further analyses of the chemical groups of the A and G bases in the UAG motif by modified base analogs suggested the importance of the exocyclic NH2 group in these bases. Also, in this motif, only the 2'-OH group of A is important for HutP recognition. Considering the important chemical groups identified here, as well as the electrostatic potential analysis of HutP, we propose that Glu137 is one of the important residues for the HutP-RNA interactions.
8555209	Contribution of cutinase serine 42 side chain to the stabilization of the oxyanion transition state.	Cutinase from the fungus Fusarium solani pisi is a lipolytic enzyme able to hydrolyze both aggregated and soluble substrates. It therefore provides a powerful tool for probing the mechanisms underlying lipid hydrolysis. Lipolytic enzymes have a catalytic machinery similar to those present in serine proteinases. It is characterized by the triad Ser, His, and Asp (Glu) residues, by an oxyanion binding site that stabilizes the transition state via hydrogen bonds with two main chain amide groups, and possibly by other determinants. It has been suggested on the basis of a covalently bond inhibitor that the cutinase oxyanion hole may consist not only of two main chain amide groups but also of the Ser42 O gamma side chain. Among the esterases and the serine and the cysteine proteases, only Streptomyces scabies esterase, subtilisin, and papain, respectively, have a side chain residue which is involved in the oxyanion hole formation. The position of the cutinase Ser42 side chain is structurally conserved in Rhizomucor miehei lipase with Ser82 O gamma, in Rhizopus delemar lipase with Thr83 O gamma 1, and in Candida antartica B lipase with Thr40 O gamma 1. To evaluate the increase in the tetrahedral intermediate stability provided by Ser42 O gamma, we mutated Ser42 into Ala. Furthermore, since the proper orientation of Ser42 O gamma is directed by Asn84, we mutated Asn84 into Ala, Leu, Asp, and Trp, respectively, to investigate the contribution of this indirect interaction to the stabilization of the oxyanion hole. The S42A mutation resulted in a drastic decrease in the activity (450-fold) without significantly perturbing the three-dimensional structure. The N84A and N84L mutations had milder kinetic effects and did not disrupt the structure of the active site, whereas the N84W and N84D mutations abolished the enzymatic activity due to drastic steric and electrostatic effects, respectively.
9030762	NMR solution structure of an oxidised thioredoxin h from the eukaryotic green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.	NMR solution structures of a cytosolic plant thioredoxin h (112 amino acids, 11.7 kDa) from the green alga Chlamydonmonas reinhardtii have been calculated on the basis of 1904 NMR distance restraints, which include 90 distances used to restrain 45 hydrogen bonds, and 44 phi dihedral restraints. The structure of C. reinhardtii thioredoxin h was solved in its oxidised form, and the ensemble of 23 converged structures superpose to the geometric average structure with an atomic rmsd of 0.080 nm +/- 0.016 for the (N, C(alpha), C) backbone atoms of residues 4-110. Comparisons with other thioredoxins, such as thioredoxin from the bacterium Escherichia coli, thioredoxin 2 from a cyanobacterium of the Anabaena genus, and human thioredoxin, showed that thioredoxin h models share more structural features with human thioredoxin than with other bacterial thioredoxins. Examination of the accessible surface around the redoxactive peptide sequence indicates that a potent thioredoxin-h-substrate interaction could be similar to the vertebrate thioredoxin-substrate interactions.
7473760	Contribution of hydrophobic residues to the stability of human lysozyme: calorimetric studies and X-ray structural analysis of the five isoleucine to valine mutants.	In order to understand the contribution of hydrophobic residues to the conformational stability of human lysozyme, five Ile mutants (Ile --> Val) in the interior of the protein were constructed. The thermodynamic parameters characterizing the denaturation of these mutant proteins were determined by scanning calorimetry, and the three-dimensional structure of each mutant protein was solved at high resolution by X-ray crystallography. The thermodynamic analyses at 64.9 degrees C and at pH 2.7 revealed the following. (1) The stabilities of all the mutant proteins were decreased as compared with that of the wild-type protein. (2) The changes in the calorimetric enthalpies were larger than those in the Gibbs energies, and were compensated by entropy changes. (3) The destabilization mechanism of the mutant proteins differs, depending on the location of the mutation sites. X-ray analyses showed that the overall structures of all the mutant human lysozymes examined were identical to that of the wild-type protein, and only small structural rearrangements were observed locally around some of the mutation sites. The most striking change among the mutant proteins was found in the mutant protein, 159V, which contains a new water molecule in the cavity created by the mutation. The thermodynamic stabilities of the mutant proteins are discussed in light of the high-resolution X-ray structures of the wild-type and five mutant human lysozymes examined.
11353825	Strong DNA binding by covalently linked dimeric Lac headpiece: evidence for the crucial role of the hinge helices.	The combined structural and biochemical studies on Lac repressor bound to operator DNA have demonstrated the central role of the hinge helices in operator bending and the induction mechanism. We have constructed a covalently linked dimeric Lac-headpiece that binds DNA with four orders of magnitude higher affinity as compared with the monomeric form. This enabled a detailed biochemical and structural study of Lac binding to its cognate wild-type and selected DNA operators. The results indicate a profound contribution of hinge helices to the stability of the protein-DNA complex and highlight their central role in operator recognition. Furthermore, protein-DNA interactions in the minor groove appear to modulate hinge helix stability, thus accounting for affinity differences and protein-induced DNA bending among the various operator sites. Interestingly, the in vitro DNA-binding affinity of the reported dimeric Lac construct can de readily modulated by simple adjustment of redox conditions, thus rendering it a potential artificial gene regulator.
7556224	Changing the reaction specificity of a pyridoxal-5'-phosphate-dependent enzyme.	The electron distribution in the coenzyme-substrate adduct of aspartate aminotransferase was changed by replacing active-site Arg386 with alanine and introducing a new arginine residue nearby. [Y225R, R386A]Aspartate aminotransferase decarboxylates L-aspartate to L-alanine (kcat = 0.04 s-1), while its transaminase activity towards dicarboxylic amino acids is decreased by three orders of magnitude (kcat = 0.19 s-1). Molecular-dynamics simulations based on the crystal structure of the mutant enzyme suggest that a new hydrogen bond to the imine N atom of the pyridoxal-5'-phosphate- aspartate adduct and an altered electrostatic potential around its beta-carboxylate group underlie the 650,000-fold increase in the ratio of beta-decarboxylase/transaminase activity.
8142383	Small molecule binding to an artificially created cavity at the active site of cytochrome c peroxidase.	In the oxidized "ES" state of cytochrome c peroxidase, Trp-191 is reversibly oxidized to a stable cation free radical by the hypervalent heme. To explore the potential for engineering a binding site for heterocyclic compounds at this site, the mutant W191G was constructed. Two independent crystal structures of W191G at 2.1- and 2.3-A resolution show that W191G contains a well-defined, approximately 180-A3 cavity at the Trp-191 site. The cavity is occupied by five ordered water molecules which participate in an extensive hydrogen-bonding network with each other, with polar main-chain atoms, and with the carboxylate of Asp-235. After a number of heterocyclic compounds were screened, evidence was obtained that substituted imidazoles bind to the cavity of W191G. Titration of W191G with imidazole resulted in a perturbation of the Soret absorption band that was not observed for W191H, W191F, or the native enzyme. The dissociation constants for binding of benzimidazole, imidazole, 2-ethylimidazole, 1-methylimidazole, 2-methylimidazole, and 1,2-dimethylimidazole to W191G were respectively 2.58, 0.70, 0.36, 0.057, 0.047, and 0.027 mM at pH 6.0. The highest binding affinity was exhibited by 1,2-dimethylimidazole, indicating that steric interactions and the efficiency of filling the cavity are important determinants for specificity. The Kd for imidazole binding increased from 0.7 mM at pH 6 to 3.0 mM at pH 8 and could be fit to a single proton ionization curve with a pKa of 7.4, demonstrating the preferential binding by the imidazolium ion (pKa = 7.3). The binding of a number of substituted imidazoles to the cavity of W191G was verified by X-ray crystallographic analysis. The most clearly defined density was observed for W191G crystals soaked in 1 mM 1,2-dimethylimidazole and was consistent with an oriented occupation in which the unsubstituted nitrogen forms a hydrogen bond or ion pair interaction with Asp-235. Thus, enhanced binding of positively charged molecules may be the result of interactions with this carboxylate. An analogous interaction may stabilize the developing positive charge on the Trp-191 radical of the wild-type enzyme. While the oxidation of imidazoles by the ferryl intermediate of W191G was neither expected nor observed, this study has defined the structural determinants for small molecule binding to an artificially created cavity near a heme center which is capable of generating oxidized species at a potential of over 1 V, and these results will guide future attempts for novel substrate oxidation by CCP.
14718923	Structural basis for dipeptide amide isoform-selective inhibition of neuronal nitric oxide synthase.	Three nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms, eNOS, nNOS and iNOS, generate nitric oxide (NO) crucial to the cardiovascular, nervous and host defense systems, respectively. Development of isoform-selective NOS inhibitors is of considerable therapeutic importance. Crystal structures of nNOS-selective dipeptide inhibitors in complex with both nNOS and eNOS were solved and the inhibitors were found to adopt a curled conformation in nNOS but an extended conformation in eNOS. We hypothesized that a single-residue difference in the active site, Asp597 (nNOS) versus Asn368 (eNOS), is responsible for the favored binding in nNOS. In the D597N nNOS mutant crystal structure, a bound inhibitor switches to the extended conformation and its inhibition of nNOS decreases >200-fold. Therefore, a single-residue difference is responsible for more than two orders of magnitude selectivity in inhibition of nNOS over eNOS by L-N(omega)-nitroarginine-containing dipeptide inhibitors.
11851415	Cation-induced stabilization of the engineered cation-binding loop in cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP).	We have previously shown that the K(+) site found in the proximal heme pocket of ascorbate peroxidase (APX) could be successfully engineered into the closely homologous cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP) [Bonagura et al., (1996) Biochemistry 35, 6107-6115; Bonagura et al. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 5538-5545]. In addition, specificity could be switched to binding Ca(2+) as found in other peroxidases [Bonagura et al. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 37827-37833]. The introduction of a proximal cation-binding site also promotes conversion of the Trp191 containing cation-binding loop from a "closed" to an "open" conformer. In the present study we have changed a crucial hinge residue of the cation-binding loop, Asn195, to Pro which stabilizes the loop, albeit, only in the presence of bound K(+). The crystal structure of this mutant, N195PK2, has been refined to 1.9 A. As predicted, introduction of this crucial hinge residue stabilizes the cation-binding loop in the presence of the bound K(+). As in earlier work, the characteristic EPR signal of Trp191 cation radical becomes progressively weaker with increasing [K(+)] and the lifetime of the Trp191 radical also has been considerably shortened in this mutant. This mutant CcP exhibits reduced enzyme activity, which could be titrated to lower levels with increasing [K(+)] when horse heart cytochrome c is the substrate. However, with yeast cytochrome c as the substrate, the mutant was as active as wild-type at low ionic strength, but 40-fold lower at high ionic strength. We attribute this difference to a change in the rate-limiting step as a function of ionic strength when yeast cytochrome c is the substrate.
11021969	Three-dimensional structure of a human pancreatic ribonuclease variant, a step forward in the design of cytotoxic ribonucleases.	We have determined the crystal structure of a human pancreatic ribonuclease or RNase 1 variant at 1.65 A resolution. Five residues in the N-terminal region were substituted by the corresponding amino acids of the bovine seminal RNase. In addition, a Pro to Ser mutation was present at position 50. The substitution of part of the N terminus has been critical both in improving the expression of this enzyme as a recombinant protein and in achieving its crystallisation. The determination of the crystal structure revealed the characteristic RNase fold including a V-shaped beta-sheet and three alpha-helices. It differs from its bovine RNase orthologue mainly in the loop regions. The active-site cleft shows a similar architecture to that of its bovine counterpart, with the essential residues occupying equivalent positions. In the present structure, however, His119 is displaced as it is in the structure of RNase A at high pH. An interaction model of human ribonuclease with the ribonuclease inhibitor, together with inhibition assays, indicate that, in contrast to RNase A, the modification of the loop beta4beta5 is not enough to avoid inhibition. This study represents the first crystallographic approach to the human enzyme, and should constitute an invaluable tool for the design of ribonuclease variants with acquired cytotoxic properties.
8003964	Enzyme IIBcellobiose of the phosphoenol-pyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system of Escherichia coli: backbone assignment and secondary structure determined by three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy.	The assignment of backbone resonances and the secondary structure determination of the Cys 10 Ser mutant of enzyme IIBcellobiose of the Escherichia coli cellobiose-specific phosphoenol-pyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system are presented. The backbone resonances were assigned using 4 triple resonance experiments, the HNCA and HN(CO)CA experiments, correlating backbone 1H, 15N, and 13C alpha resonances, and the HN(CA)CO and HNCO experiments, correlating backbone 1H,15N and 13CO resonances. Heteronuclear 1H-NOE 1H-15N single quantum coherence (15N-NOESY-HSQC) spectroscopy and heteronuclear 1H total correlation 1H-15N single quantum coherence (15N-TOCSY-HSQC) spectroscopy were used to resolve ambiguities arising from overlapping 13C alpha and 13CO frequencies and to check the assignments from the triple resonance experiments. This procedure, together with a 3-dimensional 1H alpha-13C alpha-13CO experiment (COCAH), yielded the assignment for all observed backbone resonances. The secondary structure was determined using information both from the deviation of observed 1H alpha and 13C alpha chemical shifts from their random coil values and 1H-NOE information from the 15N-NOESY-HSQC. These data show that enzyme IIBcellobiose consists of a 4-stranded parallel beta-sheet and 5 alpha-helices. In the wild-type enzyme IIBcellobiose, the catalytic residue appears to be located at the end of a beta-strand.
2163605	Disulphide bond assignment in human tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP).	Disulphide bonds in human recombinant tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP) were assigned by resolving proteolytic digests of TIMP on reverse-phase h.p.l.c. and sequencing those peaks judged to contain disulphide bonds by virtue of a change in retention time on reduction. This procedure allowed the direct assignment of Cys-145-Cys-166 and the isolation of two other peptides containing two disulphide bonds each. Further peptide cleavage in conjunction with fast-atom-bombardment m.s. analysis permitted the assignments Cys-1-Cys-70, Cys-3-Cys-99, Cys-13-Cys-124 and Cys-127-Cys-174 from these peptides. The sixth bond Cys-132-Cys-137 was assigned by inference, as the native protein has no detectable free thiol groups.
16157350	Oligosaccharide preferences of beta1,4-galactosyltransferase-I: crystal structures of Met340His mutant of human beta1,4-galactosyltransferase-I with a pentasaccharide and trisaccharides of the N-glycan moiety.	beta-1,4-Galactosyltransferase-I (beta4Gal-T1) transfers galactose from UDP-galactose to N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) residues of the branched N-linked oligosaccharide chains of glycoproteins. In an N-linked biantennary oligosaccharide chain, one antenna is attached to the 3-hydroxyl-(1,3-arm), and the other to the 6-hydroxyl-(1,6-arm) group of mannose, which is beta-1,4-linked to an N-linked chitobiose, attached to the aspargine residue of a protein. For a better understanding of the branch specificity of beta4Gal-T1 towards the GlcNAc residues of N-glycans, we have carried out kinetic and crystallographic studies with the wild-type human beta4Gal-T1 (h-beta4Gal-T1) and the mutant Met340His-beta4Gal-T1 (h-M340H-beta4Gal-T1) in complex with a GlcNAc-containing pentasaccharide and several GlcNAc-containing trisaccharides present in N-glycans. The oligosaccharides used were: pentasaccharide GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,6 (GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,3)Man; the 1,6-arm trisaccharide, GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,6-Manbeta-OR (1,2-1,6-arm); the 1,3-arm trisaccharides, GlcNAcbeta1,2-Manalpha1,3-Manbeta-OR (1,2-1,3-arm) and GlcNAcbeta1,4-Manalpha1,3-Manbeta-OR (1,4-1,3-arm); and the trisaccharide GlcNAcbeta1,4-GlcNAcbeta1,4-GlcNAc (chitotriose). With the wild-type h-beta4Gal-T1, the K(m) of 1,2-1,6-arm is approximately tenfold lower than for 1,2-1,3-arm and 1,4-1,3-arm, and 22-fold lower than for chitotriose. Crystal structures of h-M340H-beta4Gal-T1 in complex with the pentasaccharide and various trisaccharides at 1.9-2.0A resolution showed that beta4Gal-T1 is in a closed conformation with the oligosaccharide bound to the enzyme, and the 1,2-1,6-arm trisaccharide makes the maximum number of interactions with the enzyme, which is in concurrence with the lowest K(m) for the trisaccharide. Present studies suggest that beta4Gal-T1 interacts preferentially with the 1,2-1,6-arm trisaccharide rather than with the 1,2-1,3-arm or 1,4-1,3-arm of a bi- or tri-antennary oligosaccharide chain of N-glycan.
15784976	A series of crystal structures of a meta-cleavage product hydrolase from Pseudomonas fluorescens IP01 (CumD) complexed with various cleavage products.	Meta-cleavage product hydrolase (MCP-hydrolase) is one of the key enzymes in the microbial degradation of aromatic compounds. MCP-hydrolase produces 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate and various organic acids, according to the C6 substituent of the substrate. Comprehensive analysis of the substrate specificity of the MCP-hydrolase from Pseudomonas fluorescens IP01 (CumD) was carried out by determining the kinetic parameters for nine substrates and crystal structures complexed with eight cleavage products. CumD preferred substrates with long non-branched C6 substituents, but did not effectively hydrolyze a substrate with a phenyl group. Superimposition of the complex structures indicated that benzoate was bound in a significantly different direction than other aliphatic cleavage products. The directions of the bound organic acids appeared to be related with the k(cat) values of the corresponding substrates. The Ile139 and Trp143 residues on helix alpha4 appeared to cause steric hindrance with the aromatic ring of the substrate, which hampers base-catalyzed attack by water.
6310508	The nucleotide sequence of poliovirus type 3 leon 12 a1b: comparison with poliovirus type 1.	The complete nucleotide sequence of the genome of the Sabin vaccine strain of poliovirus type 3 (P3/Leon 12 a1 b) has been determined from cDNA cloned in E. coli. The genome comprises a 5' non-coding region of 742 nucleotides, a large open reading frame of 6618 nucleotides (89% of the sequence) and a 3' non-coding region of 72 nucleotides. There is 77.4% base-sequence homology and 89.6% predicted amino-acid homology between types 1 and 3. Conservation of all glutamine-glycine and tyrosine-glycine cleavage sites suggests a mechanism of polyprotein processing similar to that established for poliovirus type 1.
12902323	Roles of His291-alpha and His146-beta' in the reductive acylation reaction catalyzed by human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase: refined phosphorylation loop structure in the active site.	We report here that alterations of either His291-alpha or His146-beta' in the active site of human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (E1b) impede both the decarboxylation and the reductive acylation reactions catalyzed by E1b as well as the binding of cofactor thiamin diphosphate (ThDP). In a refined human E1b active-site structure, His291-alpha, which aligns with His407 in Escherichia coli pyruvate dehydrogenase and His263 in yeast transketolase, is on a largely ordered phosphorylation loop. The imidazole ring of His291-alpha in E1b coordinates to the terminal phosphate oxygen atoms of bound ThDP. The N3 atom of wild-type His146-beta', which can be protonated, binds a water molecule and points toward the aminopyrimidine ring of ThDP. Remarkably, the H291A-alpha mutation results in a complete order-to-disorder transition of the loop region, which precludes the binding of the substrate lipoyl-bearing domain to E1b. The H146A-beta' mutation, on the other hand, does not alter the loop structure, but nullifies the reductive acylation activity of E1b. Our results suggest that: 1) His291-alpha plays a structural rather than a catalytic role in the binding of cofactor ThDP and the lipoyl-bearing domain to E1b, and 2) His146-beta' is an essential catalytic residue, probably functioning as a proton donor in the reductive acylation of lipoamide on the lipoyl-bearing domain.
10669610	Structural basis for the higher Ca(2+)-activation of the regulated actin-activated myosin ATPase observed with Dictyostelium/Tetrahymena actin chimeras.	Replacement of residues 228-230 or 228-232 of subdomain 4 in Dictyostelium actin with the corresponding Tetrahymena sequence (QTA to KAY replacement: half chimera-1; QTAAS to KAYKE replacement: full chimera) leads to a higher Ca(2+)-activation of the regulated acto-myosin subfragment-1 ATPase activity. The ratio of ATPase activation in the presence of tropomyosin-troponin and Ca(2+) to that without tropomyosin-troponin becomes about four times as large as the ratio for the wild-type actin. To understand the structural basis of this higher Ca(2+)-activation, we have determined the crystal structures of the 1:1 complex of Dictyostelium mutant actins (half chimera-1 and full chimera) with gelsolin segment-1 to 2.0 A and 2.4 A resolution, respectively, together with the structure of wild-type actin as a control. Although there were local changes on the surface of the subdomain 4 and the phenolic side-chain of Tyr230 displaced the side-chain of Leu236 from a non-polar pocket to a more solvent-accessible position, the structures of the actin chimeras showed that the mutations in the 228-232 region did not introduce large changes in the overall actin structure. This suggests that residues near position 230 formed part of the tropomyosin binding site on actin in actively contracting muscle. The higher Ca(2+)-activation observed with A230Y-containing mutants can be understood in terms of a three-state model for thin filament regulation in which, in the presence of both Ca(2+) and myosin heads, the local changes of actin generated by the mutation (especially its phenolic side-chain) facilitate the transition of thin filaments from a "closed" state to an "open" state. Between 394 and 469 water molecules were identified in the different structures and it was found that actin recognizes hydrated forms of the adenine base and the Ca ion in the nucleotide binding site.
10899999	NMR structure of the bovine prion protein.	The NMR structures of the recombinant 217-residue polypeptide chain of the mature bovine prion protein, bPrP(23-230), and a C-terminal fragment, bPrP(121-230), include a globular domain extending from residue 125 to residue 227, a short flexible chain end of residues 228-230, and an N-terminal flexibly disordered "tail" comprising 108 residues for the intact protein and 4 residues for bPrP(121-230), respectively. The globular domain contains three alpha-helices comprising the residues 144-154, 173-194, and 200-226, and a short antiparallel beta-sheet comprising the residues 128-131 and 161-164. The best-defined parts of the globular domain are the central portions of the helices 2 and 3, which are linked by the only disulfide bond in bPrP. Significantly increased disorder and mobility is observed for helix 1, the loop 166-172 leading from the beta-strand 2 to helix 2, the end of helix 2 and the following loop, and the last turn of helix 3. Although there are characteristic local differences relative to the conformations of the murine and Syrian hamster prion proteins, the bPrP structure is essentially identical to that of the human prion protein. On the other hand, there are differences between bovine and human PrP in the surface distribution of electrostatic charges, which then appears to be the principal structural feature of the "healthy" PrP form that might affect the stringency of the species barrier for transmission of prion diseases between humans and cattle.
1380671	Crystal structures explain functional properties of two E. coli porins.	Porins form aqueous channels that aid the diffusion of small hydrophilic molecules across the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The crystal structures of matrix porin and phosphoporin both reveal trimers of identical subunits, each subunit consisting of a 16-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel containing a pore. A long loop inside the barrel contributes to a constriction of the channel where the charge distribution affects ion selectivity. The structures explain at the molecular level functional characteristics and their alterations by known mutations.
12717027	The catalytic mechanism of galactose mutarotase.	Galactose mutarotase catalyzes the first step in normal galactose metabolism by catalyzing the conversion of beta-D-galactose to alpha-D-galactose. The structure of the enzyme from Lactococcus lactis was recently solved in this laboratory and shown to be topologically similar to domain 5 of beta-galactosidase. From this initial X-ray analysis, four amino acid residues were demonstrated to be intimately involved in sugar binding to the protein: His 96, His 170, Asp 243, and Glu 304. Here we present a combined X-ray crystallographic and kinetic analysis designed to examine the role of these residues in the reaction mechanism of the enzyme. For this investigation, the following site-directed mutant proteins were prepared: H96N, H170N, D243N, D243A, E304Q, and E304A. All of the structures of these proteins, complexed with either glucose or galactose, were solved to a nominal resolution of 1.95 A or better, and their kinetic parameters were measured against D-galactose, D-glucose, L-arabinose, or D-xylose. From these studies, it can be concluded that Glu 304 and His 170 are critical for catalysis and that His 96 and Asp 243 are important for proper substrate positioning within the active site. Specifically, Glu 304 serves as the active site base to initiate the reaction by removing the proton from the C-1 hydroxyl group of the sugar substrate and His 170 functions as the active site acid to protonate the C-5 ring oxygen.
8946848	An atomic view of the L-tryptophan binding site of trp repressor.	null
2026135	Crystal structure of haloalkane dehalogenase: an enzyme to detoxify halogenated alkanes.	Haloalkane dehalogenase from Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10 converts 1-haloalkanes to the corresponding alcohols and halide ions with water as the sole cosubstrate and without any need for oxygen or cofactors. The three-dimensional structure has been determined by multiple isomorphous replacement techniques using three heavy atom derivatives. The structure has been refined at 2.4 A resolution to an R-factor of 17.9%. The monomeric enzyme is a spherical molecule and is composed to two domains: domain I has an alpha/beta type structure with a central eight-stranded mainly parallel beta-sheet. Domain II lies like a cap on top of domain I and consists of alpha-helices connected by loops. Except for the cap domain the structure resembles that of the dienelactone hydrolase in spite of any significant sequence homology. The putative active site is completely buried in an internal hydrophobic cavity which is located between the two domains. From the analysis of the structure it is suggested that Asp124 is the nucleophilic residue essential for the catalysis. It interacts with His289 which is hydrogen-bonded to Asp260.
16183520	Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.	
7857935	X-ray structure of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase complexed with acarbose. Implications for the catalytic mechanism of glycosidases.	Crystals of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase (CGTase) from Bacillus circulans strain 251 were soaked in buffer solutions containing the pseudotetrasaccharide acarbose, a strong amylase- and CGTase inhibitor. The X-ray structure of the complex was elucidated at 2.5-A resolution with a final crystallographic R value of 15.8% for all data between 8.0 and 2.5 A. Acarbose is bound near the catalytic residues Asp229, Glu257, and Asp328. The carboxylic group of Glu257 is at hydrogen bonding distance from the glycosidic oxygen in the scissile bond between the B and C sugars (residue A is at the nonreducing end of the inhibitor). Asp328 makes hydrogen bonds with the 4-amino-4,6-dideoxyglucose (residue B), and Asp229 is in a close van der Waals contact with the C1 atom of this sugar. From this we conclude that in CGTase Glu257 acts as the proton donor and Asp229 serves as the general base or nucleophile, while Asp328 is involved in substrate binding and may be important for elevating the pKa of Glu257. On the basis of these results it appears that the absence of the C6-hydroxyl group in the B sugar is responsible for the inhibitory properties of acarbose on CGTase. This suggests that the C6-hydroxyl group of this sugar plays an essential role in the catalytic mechanism of CGTase.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
10051558	Unexpected crucial role of residue 225 in serine proteases.	Residue 225 in serine proteases of the chymotrypsin family is Pro or Tyr in more than 95% of nearly 300 available sequences. Proteases with Y225 (like some blood coagulation and complement factors) are almost exclusively found in vertebrates, whereas proteases with P225 (like degradative enzymes) are present from bacteria to human. Saturation mutagenesis of Y225 in thrombin shows that residue 225 affects ligand recognition up to 60,000-fold. With the exception of Tyr and Phe, all residues are associated with comparable or greatly reduced catalytic activity relative to Pro. The crystal structures of three mutants that differ widely in catalytic activity (Y225F, Y225P, and Y225I) show that although residue 225 makes no contact with substrate, it drastically influences the shape of the water channel around the primary specificity site. The activity profiles obtained for thrombin also suggest that the conversion of Pro to Tyr or Phe documented in the vertebrates occurred through Ser and was driven by a significant gain (up to 50-fold) in catalytic activity. In fact, Ser and Phe are documented in 4% of serine proteases, which together with Pro and Tyr account for almost the entire distribution of residues at position 225. The unexpected crucial role of residue 225 in serine proteases explains the evolutionary selection of residues at this position and shows that the structural determinants of protease activity and specificity are more complex than currently believed. These findings have broad implications in the rational design of enzymes with enhanced catalytic properties.
12705909	Coral bleaching--how and why?	Bleaching refers to the loss of colour in symbioses between dinoflagellate algae of the genus Symbiodinium and marine benthic animals, e.g. corals. Bleaching generally results in depressed growth and increased mortality, and it can be considered as a deleterious physiological response or ailment. An explanatory framework for the causes of bleaching comprises three elements: the external factors or triggers of bleaching, e.g. elevated temperature; the symptoms, including elimination of algal cells and loss of algal pigment; and the mechanisms, which define the response of the symbiosis to the triggers, resulting in the observed symptoms. The extent to which bleaching in different symbioses and in response to different triggers involves common mechanisms is currently unknown, but a contribution of interactions between the algal and animal partners to bleaching is predicted. Symbioses vary in their susceptibility to bleaching as a result of genetic variation in Symbiodinium and acclimatory responses of the animal. The evolutionary explanation for bleaching is obscure. Perhaps, bleaching was of selective advantage to the animal hosts under different (more benign?) environmental conditions than the present, or bleaching may be a negative by-product of an otherwise advantageous symbiotic trait, such as the elimination of damaged algal cells.
7473717	Structural studies on human rhinovirus 14 drug-resistant compensation mutants.	Structures have been determined of three human rhinovirus 14 (HRV14) compensation mutants that have resistance to the antiviral capsid binding compounds WIN 52035 and WIN 52084. In addition, the structure of HRV14 is reported, with a site-directed mutation at residue 1219 in VP1. A spontaneous mutation occurs at the same site in one of the compensation mutants. Some of the mutations are on the viral surface in the canyon and some lie within the hydrophobic binding pocket in VP1 below the ICAM footprint. Those mutant virus strains with mutations on the surface bind better to cells than does wild-type virus. The antiviral compounds bind to the mutant viruses in a manner similar to their binding to wild-type virus. The receptor and WIN compound binding sites overlap, causing competition between receptor attachment and antiviral compound binding. The compensation mutants probably function by shifting the equilibrium in favor of receptor binding. The mutations in the canyon increase the affinity of the virus for the receptor, while the mutations in the pocket probably decrease the affinity of the WIN compounds for the virus by reducing favorable hydrophobic contacts and constricting the pore through which the antiviral compounds are thought to enter the pocket. This is in contrast to the resistant exclusion mutants that block compounds from binding by increasing the bulk of residues within the hydrophobic pocket in VP1.
12904027	Structural aspects for evolution of beta-lactamases from penicillin-binding proteins.	Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), biosynthetic enzymes of bacterial cell wall assembly, and beta-lactamases, resistance enzymes to beta-lactam antibiotics, are related to each other from an evolutionary point of view. Massova and Mobashery (Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1998, 42, 1-17) have proposed that for beta-lactamases to have become effective at their function as antibiotic resistance enzymes, they would have had to undergo structure alterations such that they would not interact with the peptidoglycan, which is the substrate for PBPs. A cephalosporin analogue, 7beta-[N-Acetyl-L-alanyl-gamma-D-glutamyl-L-lysine]-3-acetoxymethyl-3-cephem-carboxylic acid (compound 6), was conceived and synthesized to test this notion. The X-ray structure of the complex of this cephalosporin bound to the active site of the deacylation-deficient Q120L/Y150E variant of the class C AmpC beta-lactamase from Escherichia coli was solved at 1.71 A resolution. This complex revealed that the surface for interaction with the strand of peptidoglycan that acylates the active site, which is present in PBPs, is absent in the -lactamase active site. Furthermore, insertion of a peptide in the beta-lactamase active site at a location where the second strand of peptidoglycan in some PBPs binds has effectively abolished the possibility for such interaction with the beta-lactamase. A 2.6 ns dynamics simulation was carried out for the complex, which revealed that the peptidoglycan surrogate (i.e., the active-site-bound ligand) undergoes substantial motion and is not stabilized for binding within the active site. These factors taken together disclose the set of structure modifications in the antibiotic resistance enzyme that prevent it from interacting with the peptidoglycan, en route to achieving catalytic proficiency for their intended function.
10556244	Contribution of amino acid substitutions at two different interior positions to the conformational stability of human lysozyme.	To elucidate correlative relationships between structural change and thermodynamic stability in proteins, a series of mutant human lysozymes modified at two buried positions (Ile56 and Ile59) were examined. Their thermodynamic parameters of denaturation and crystal structures were studied by calorimetry and X-ray crystallography. The mutants at positions 56 and 59 exhibited different responses to a series of amino acid substitutions. The changes in stability due to substitutions showed a linear correlation with changes in hydrophobicity of substituted residues, having different slopes at each mutation site. However, the stability of each mutant was found to be represented by a unique equation involving physical properties calculated from mutant structures. By fitting present and previous stability data for mutant human lysozymes substituted at various positions to the equation, the magnitudes of the hydrophobicity of a carbon atom and the hydrophobicity of nitrogen and neutral oxygen atoms were found to be 0.178 and -0.013 kJ/mol.A(2), respectively. It was also found that the contribution of a hydrogen bond with a length of 3.0 A to protein stability was 5.1 kJ/mol and the entropy loss of newly introduction of a water molecules was 7.8 kJ/mol.
8634253	An engineered cation site in cytochrome c peroxidase alters the reactivity of the redox active tryptophan.	The crystal structures of cytochrome c peroxidase and ascorbate peroxidase are very similar, including the active site architecture. Both peroxidases have a tryptophan residue, designated the proximal Trp, located directly adjacent to the proximal histidine heme ligand. During the catalytic cycle, the proximal Trp in cytochrome c peroxidase is oxidized to a cation radical. However, in ascorbate peroxidase, the porphyrin is oxidized, not the proximal Trp, despite the close similarity between the two peroxidase active site structures. A cation located approximately 8 A from the proximal Trp in ascorbate peroxidase but absent in cytochrome c peroxidase is thought to be one reason why ascorbate peroxidase does not form a Trp radical. Site-directed mutagenesis has been used to introduce the ascorbate peroxidase cation binding site into cytochrome c peroxidase. Crystal structures show that mutants now bind a cation. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy shows that the cation-containing mutants of cytochrome c peroxidase no longer form a stable Trp radical. The activity of the cation mutants using ferrocytochrome c as a substrate is < 1% of wild type levels, while the activity toward a small molecule substrate, guaiacol, increases. These results demonstrate that long range electrostatic effects can control the reactivity of a redox active amino acid side chain and that oxidation/reduction of the proximal Trp is important in the oxidation of ferrocytochrome c.
7890671	Crystal structures of recombinant rat cathepsin B and a cathepsin B-inhibitor complex. Implications for structure-based inhibitor design.	The lysosomal cysteine proteinase cathepsin B (EC 3.4.22.1) plays an important role in protein catabolism and has also been implicated in various disease states. The crystal structures of two forms of native recombinant rat cathepsin B have been determined. The overall folding of rat cathepsin B was shown to be very similar to that of the human liver enzyme. The structure of the native enzyme containing an underivatized active site cysteine (Cys29) showed the active enzyme conformation to be similar to that determined previously for the oxidized form. In a second structure Cys29 was derivatized with the reversible blocking reagent pyridyl disulfide. In this structure large side chain conformational changes were observed for the two key catalytic residues Cys29 and His199, demonstrating the potential flexibility of these side chains. In addition the structure of the complex between rat cathepsin B and the inhibitor benzyloxycarbonyl-Arg-Ser(O-Bzl) chloromethylketone was determined. The complex structure showed that very little conformational change occurs in the enzyme upon inhibitor binding. It also allowed visualization of the interaction between the enzyme and inhibitor. In particular the interaction between Glu245 and the P2 Arg residue was clearly demonstrated, and it was found that the benzyl group of the P1 substrate residue occupies a large hydrophobic pocket thought to represent the S'1 subsite. This may have important implications for structure-based design of cathepsin B inhibitors.
7626635	Crystal structure of a D-amino acid aminotransferase: how the protein controls stereoselectivity.	The three-dimensional structure of D-amino acid aminotransferase (D-AAT) in the pyridoxamine phosphate form has been determined crystallographically. The fold of this pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-containing enzyme is completely different from those of any of the other enzymes that utilize PLP as part of their mechanism and whose structures are known. However, there are some striking similarities between the active sites of D-AAT and the corresponding enzyme that transaminates L-amino acids, L-aspartate aminotransferase. These similarities represent convergent evolution to a common solution of the problem of enforcing transamination chemistry on the PLP cofactor. Implications of these similarities are discussed in terms of their possible roles in the stabilization of intermediates of a transamination reaction. In addition, sequence similarity between D-AAT and branched chain L-amino acid aminotransferase suggests that this latter enzyme will also have a fold similar to that of D-AAT.
15242603	Crystal structure of activated HutP; an RNA binding protein that regulates transcription of the hut operon in Bacillus subtilis.	HutP is an L-histidine-activated RNA binding protein that regulates the expression of the histidine utilization (hut) operon in Bacillus subtilis by binding to cis-acting regulatory sequences on the hut mRNA. The crystal structure of HutP complexed with an L-histidine analog showed a novel fold; there are four antiparallel beta strands in the central region of each monomer, with two alpha helices each on the front and back. Two HutP monomers form a dimer, and three dimers are arranged in crystallographic 3-fold symmetry to form a hexamer. A histidine analog was located in between the two monomers of HutP, with the imidazole group of L-histidine hydrogen bonded to Glu81. An activation mechanism is proposed based on the identification of key residues of HutP. The HutP binding region in hut mRNA was defined: it consists of three UAG trinucleotide motifs separated by four spacer nucleotides. Residues of HutP potentially important for RNA binding were identified.
8918883	Structural basis for the binding of a globular antifreeze protein to ice.	Antifreeze proteins (AFPs) have the unique ability to adsorb to ice and inhibit its growth. Many organisms ranging from fish to bacteria use AFPs to retard freezing or lessen the damage incurred upon freezing and thawing. The ice-binding mechanism of the long linear alpha-helical type I AFPs has been attributed to their regularly spaced polar residues matching the ice lattice along a pyramidal plane. In contrast, it is not known how globular antifreeze proteins such as type III AFP that lack repeating ice-binding residues bind to ice. Here we report the 1.25 A crystal structure of recombinant type III AFP (QAE isoform) from eel pout (Macrozoarces americanus), which reveals a remarkably flat amphipathic ice-binding site where five hydrogen-bonding atoms match two ranks of oxygens on the [1010] ice prism plane in the <0001> direction, giving high ice-binding affinity and specificity. This binding site, substantiated by the structures and properties of several ice-binding site mutants, suggests that the AFP occupies a niche in the ice surface in which it covers the basal plane while binding to the prism face.
11279193	Molecular basis for severe epimerase deficiency galactosemia. X-ray structure of the human V94m-substituted UDP-galactose 4-epimerase.	Galactosemia is an inherited disorder characterized by an inability to metabolize galactose. Although classical galactosemia results from impairment of the second enzyme of the Leloir pathway, namely galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase, alternate forms of the disorder can occur due to either galactokinase or UDP-galactose 4-epimerase deficiencies. One of the more severe cases of epimerase deficiency galactosemia arises from an amino acid substitution at position 94. It has been previously demonstrated that the V94M protein is impaired relative to the wild-type enzyme predominantly at the level of V(max) rather than K(m). To address the molecular consequences the mutation imparts on the three-dimensional architecture of the enzyme, we have solved the structures of the V94M-substituted human epimerase complexed with NADH and UDP-glucose, UDP-galactose, UDP-GlcNAc, or UDP-GalNAc. In the wild-type enzyme, the hydrophobic side chain of Val(94) packs near the aromatic group of the catalytic Tyr(157) and serves as a molecular "fence" to limit the rotation of the glycosyl portions of the UDP-sugar substrates within the active site. The net effect of the V94M substitution is an opening up of the Ala(93) to Glu(96) surface loop, which allows free rotation of the sugars into nonproductive binding modes.
11781092	Two glutamate residues, Glu 208 alpha and Glu 197 beta, are crucial for phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the active-site histidine residue in succinyl-CoA synthetase.	Succinyl-CoA synthetase catalyzes the reversible reaction succinyl-CoA + NDP + P(i) <--> succinate + CoA + NTP (N denoting adenosine or guanosine). The enzyme consists of two different subunits, designated alpha and beta. During the reaction, a histidine residue of the alpha-subunit is transiently phosphorylated. This histidine residue interacts with Glu 208 alpha at site I in the structures of phosphorylated and dephosphorylated Escherichia coli SCS. We postulated that Glu 197 beta, a residue in the nucleotide-binding domain, would provide similar stabilization of the histidine residue during the actual phosphorylation/dephosphorylation by nucleotide at site II. In this work, these two glutamate residues have been mutated individually to aspartate or glutamine. Glu 197 beta has been additionally mutated to alanine. The mutant proteins were tested for their ability to be phosphorylated in the forward or reverse direction. The aspartate mutant proteins can be phosphorylated in either direction, while the E208 alpha Q mutant protein can only be phosphorylated by NTP, and the E197 beta Q mutant protein can only be phosphorylated by succinyl-CoA and P(i). These results demonstrate that the length of the side chain at these positions is not critical, but that the charge is. Most significantly, the E197 beta A mutant protein could not be phosphorylated in either direction. Its crystal structure shows large differences from the wild-type enzyme in the conformation of two residues of the alpha-subunit, Cys 123 alpha-Pro 124 alpha. We postulate that in this conformation, the protein cannot productively bind succinyl-CoA for phosphorylation via succinyl-CoA and P(i).
12939145	Molecular engineering of myoglobin: influence of residue 68 on the rate and the enantioselectivity of oxidation reactions catalyzed by H64D/V68X myoglobin.	In the elucidation of structural requirements of heme vicinity for hydrogen peroxide activation, we found that the replacement of His-64 of myoglobin (Mb) with a negatively charged aspartate residue enhanced peroxidase and peroxygenase activities by 78- and 580-fold, respectively. Since residue 68 is known to influence the ligation of small molecules to the heme iron, we constructed H64D/V68X Mb bearing Ala, Ser, Leu, Ile, and Phe at position 68 to improve the oxidation activity. The Val-68 to Leu mutation of H64D Mb accelerates the reaction with H(2)O(2) to form a catalytic species, called compound I, and improves the one-electron oxidation of 2,2'-azinobis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) (i.e., peroxidase activity) approximately 2-fold. On the other hand, H64D/V68I Mb oxygenates thioanisole 2.7- and 1600-fold faster than H64D and wild-type Mb, respectively. In terms of the enantioselectivity, H64D/V68A and H64D/V68S Mb were good chiral catalysts for thioanisole oxidation and produced the (R)-sulfoxide dominantly with 84% and 88% ee, respectively [Kato, S., et al. (2002) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 8506-8507]. On the contrary, the substitution of Val-68 in H64D Mb with an isoleucine residue alters the dominant sulfoxide product from the (R)- to the (S)-isomer. The crystal structures of H64D/V68A and H64D/V68S Mb elucidated in this study do not clearly indicate residues interacting with thioanisole. However, comparison of the active site structures provides the basis to interpret the changes in oxidation activity: (1) direct steric interactions between residue 68 and substrates (i.e., H(2)O(2), ABTS, thioanisole) and (2) the polar interactions between tightly hydrogen-bonded water molecules and substrates.
8038153	Structural characteristics for biological activity of heat-stable enterotoxin produced by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli: X-ray crystallography of weakly toxic and nontoxic analogs.	Heat-stable enterotoxin (ST) produced by a pathogenic strain of Escherichia coli exerts its function by binding to a membrane-bound guanylyl cyclase on intestinal epithelial cell membranes, which in turn catalyzes the production of cyclic GMP as a second messenger in the cells. To elucidate the structural requirements for the biological activities of ST, we synthesized [Mpr5,Gly13]STp(5-17) and [Mpr5,Leu13]STp(5-17), which are weakly toxic and nontoxic analogs of STp, in which the toxic domain consists of the sequence from Cys at position 5 to Cys at position 17. In these analogs, Cys at position 5 is replaced by Mpr (beta-mercaptopropionic acid) and Ala at position 13 by Gly and Leu, respectively. We examined these analogs by X-ray diffraction analysis using direct methods and refined the structures to crystallographic R factors of 7.3% and 6.6% using 5492 and 5122 data, respectively, observed > 3 sigma (Fo) with a resolution of 0.89 A. These peptides have a right-handed spiral structure consisting of three structural segments: an N-terminal 3(10) helix, a central type I beta-turn, and a C-terminal type II beta-turn. These structures show minor differences from that of [Mpr5]STp(5-17), the fully toxic analog of heat-stable enterotoxin [Ozaki et al. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 5934-5941], suggesting that the decrease and loss of the biological activities of [Mpr5,Gly13]STp(5-17) and [Mpr5,Leu13]STp(5-17), respectively, are not caused by structural changes but are associated with the direct interaction of Ala13 with the receptor protein. Careful comparison of these structures in crystalline states revealed that ST has the following structural characteristics: (i) inherent flexibility at the junctions of the three segments and in the central segment, which includes the putative receptor-binding residues, Ala13, (ii) a specific hydrophobic character around the central segment, and (iii) an unexpected C-terminal folding similar to those of functionally unrelated peptides that are known to be ionophores.
8535785	The structure of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase complexed with 9-chloro-TIBO: lessons for inhibitor design.	BACKGROUND: HIV reverse transcriptase (RT) is a key target of anti-AIDS therapies. Structural studies of HIV-1 RT, unliganded and complexed with different non-nucleoside inhibitors (NNIs), have pointed to a common mode of binding and inactivation through distortion of the polymerase catalytic site by NNIs containing two hinged rings. The mode of binding of the TIBO family of inhibitors is of interest because these compounds do not fit the two-hinged-ring model. RESULTS: The structure of HIV-1 RT complexed with 9-chloro-TIBO (R82913) has been determined at 2.6 A resolution. As reported for the lower resolution analysis of another TIBO compound, this inhibitor binds at the same site as other NNIs, but our higher resolution study reveals the Cl-TIBO is distorted from the conformation seen in crystals of the inhibitor alone. This allows Cl-TIBO to mimic the binding of NNIs containing two hinged rings. Inhibitor-protein interactions are again predominantly hydrophobic and the protein conformation corresponds to that seen in complexes with other tight-binding NNIs. CONCLUSIONS: Although Cl-TIBO is chemically very different from other NNIs, it achieves remarkable spatial equivalence and shape complementarity with other NNIs on binding to RT. Comparison of the different RT-NNI complexes suggests modifications to the TIBO group of inhibitors which might enhance their binding and hence, potentially, their therapeutic efficacy.
12368900	The catalytic mechanism of the ESA1 histone acetyltransferase involves a self-acetylated intermediate.	Yeast ESA1 is a member of the MYST subfamily of histone acetyltransferases (HATs), which use acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) to acetylate specific Lys residues within histones to regulate gene expression. The structure of an ESA1-CoA complex reveals structural similarity to the catalytic core of the GCN5/PCAF subfamily of HAT proteins. Here we report additional structural and functional studies on ESA1 that demonstrate that histone acetylation proceeds through an acetyl-cysteine enzyme intermediate. This Cys residue is strictly conserved within the MYST members, suggesting a common mode of catalysis by this HAT subfamily. However, this mode of catalysis differs dramatically from the GCN5/PCAF subfamily, which mediate direct nucleophilic attack of the acetyl-CoA cofactor by the enzyme-deprotonated substrate lysine of the histone. These results demonstrate that different HAT subfamilies can use distinct catalytic mechanisms, which have implications for their distinct biological roles and for the development of HAT-specific inhibitors.
11467966	Crystal structures of amylosucrase from Neisseria polysaccharea in complex with D-glucose and the active site mutant Glu328Gln in complex with the natural substrate sucrose.	The structure of amylosucrase from Neisseria polysaccharea in complex with beta-D-glucose has been determined by X-ray crystallography at a resolution of 1.66 A. Additionally, the structure of the inactive active site mutant Glu328Gln in complex with sucrose has been determined to a resolution of 2.0 A. The D-glucose complex shows two well-defined D-glucose molecules, one that binds very strongly in the bottom of a pocket that contains the proposed catalytic residues (at the subsite -1), in a nonstrained (4)C(1) conformation, and one that binds in the packing interface to a symmetry-related molecule. A third weaker D-glucose-binding site is located at the surface near the active site pocket entrance. The orientation of the D-glucose in the active site emphasizes the Glu328 role as the general acid/base. The binary sucrose complex shows one molecule bound in the active site, where the glucosyl moiety is located at the alpha-amylase -1 position and the fructosyl ring occupies subsite +1. Sucrose effectively blocks the only visible access channel to the active site. From analysis of the complex it appears that sucrose binding is primarily obtained through enzyme interactions with the glucosyl ring and that an important part of the enzyme function is a precise alignment of a lone pair of the linking O1 oxygen for hydrogen bond interaction with Glu328. The sucrose specificity appears to be determined primarily by residues Asp144, Asp394, Arg446, and Arg509. Both Asp394 and Arg446 are located in an insert connecting beta-strand 7 and alpha-helix 7 that is much longer in amylosucrase compared to other enzymes from the alpha-amylase family (family 13 of the glycoside hydrolases).
11061974	A snapshot of a transition state analogue of a novel thermophilic esterase belonging to the subfamily of mammalian hormone-sensitive lipase.	EST2 is a novel thermophilic carboxylesterase, isolated and cloned from Alicyclobacillus (formerly Bacillus) acidocaldarius, which optimally hydrolyses esters with acyl chain lengths of six to eight carbon atoms at 70 degrees C. On the basis of the amino acid sequence homology, it has been classified as a member of the mammalian hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) subfamily.The crystal structure of EST2, complexed with a sulphonyl derivative, has been determined at 2.6 A resolution by a multiple wavelength anomalous diffraction experiment on a seleno-methionine derivative. EST2 presents a canonical alpha/beta hydrolase core, shielded at the C-terminal side by a cap region built up of five helices. It contains the lipase-like catalytic triad, Ser155, His282 and Asp252, whereby the nucleophile is covalently modified. This allows an unambiguous view of the putative active site of EST2, detecting the oxyanion hole, in whose formation the amino acid sequence motif His81-Gly82-Gly83-Gly84 is involved, and the hydrophobic binding pocket for the acyl chain. The structural model here reported provides the first example of a transition state analogue of an esterase/lipase belonging to the HSL group, thus affording useful information for the design of medical inhibitors. Moreover, as the first X-ray structure of a thermophilic carboxylesterase, the comparison with its mesophilic homologue, the Brefeldin A esterase (BFAE) from Bacillus subtilis, allows the identification of putative determinants of thermal stability.
11080630	Structural basis for the resilience of efavirenz (DMP-266) to drug resistance mutations in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.	BACKGROUND: Efavirenz is a second-generation non-nucleoside inhibitor of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) that has recently been approved for use against HIV-1 infection. Compared with first-generation drugs such as nevirapine, efavirenz shows greater resilience to drug resistance mutations within HIV-1 RT. In order to understand the basis for this resilience at the molecular level and to help the design of further-improved anti-AIDS drugs, we have determined crystal structures of efavirenz and nevirapine with wild-type RT and the clinically important K103N mutant. RESULTS: The relatively compact efavirenz molecule binds, as expected, within the non-nucleoside inhibitor binding pocket of RT. There are significant rearrangements of the drug binding site within the mutant RT compared with the wild-type enzyme. These changes, which lead to the repositioning of the inhibitor, are not seen in the interaction with the first-generation drug nevirapine. CONCLUSIONS: The repositioning of efavirenz within the drug binding pocket of the mutant RT, together with conformational rearrangements in the protein, could represent a general mechanism whereby certain second-generation non-nucleoside inhibitors are able to reduce the effect of drug-resistance mutations on binding potency.
8396120	Sequencing and characterization of a gene cluster encoding the enzymes for L-rhamnose metabolism in Escherichia coli.	The sequencing of the EcoRI-HindIII fragment complementing mutations in the structural genes of the L-rhamnose regulon of Escherichia coli has permitted identification of the open reading frames corresponding to rhaB, rhaA, and rhaD. The deduced amino acid sequences gave a 425-amino-acid polypeptide corresponding to rhamnulose kinase for rhaB, a 400-amino-acid polypeptide corresponding to rhamnose isomerase for rhaA, and a 274-amino-acid polypeptide corresponding to rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase for rhaD. Transcriptional fusions of the three putative promoter regions to lacZ showed that only the rhaB leader region acted as a promoter, as indicated by the high beta-galactosidase activity induced by rhamnose, while no significant activity from the rhaA and rhaD constructions was detected. The rhaB transcription start site was mapped to -24 relative to the start of translation. Mutations in the catabolic genes were used to show that L-rhamnose may directly induce rhaBAD transcription.
7885471	Structural basis of cell-cell adhesion by cadherins.	Crystal structures of the amino-terminal domain of N-cadherin provide a picture at the atomic level of a specific adhesive contact between cells. A repeated set of dimer interfaces is common to the structure in three lattices. These interactions combine to form a linear zipper of molecules that mirrors the linear structure of the intracellular filaments with which cadherins associate. This cell-adhesion zipper may provide a mechanism to marshal individual molecular adhesive interactions into strong bonds between cells.
3107125	Bacterial resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics: crystal structure of beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 at 2.5 A resolution.	beta-lactamases are enzymes that protect bacteria from the lethal effects of beta-lactam antibiotics, and are therefore of considerable clinical importance. The crystal structure of beta-lactamase from the Gram-positive bacterium Staphylococcus aureus PC1 has been determined at 2.5 angstrom resolution. It reveals a molecule of novel topology, made up of two closely associated domains. The active site is located at the interface between the domains, with the key catalytic residue Ser70 at the amino terminus of a buried helix. Examination of the disposition of the functionally important residues within the active site depression leads to a model for the binding of a substrate and a functional analogy to the serine proteases. The unusual topology of the secondary structure units is relevant to questions concerning the evolutionary relation to the beta-lactam target enzymes of the bacterial cell wall.
9341204	Site-directed mutants of pseudoazurin: explanation of increased redox potentials from X-ray structures and from calculation of redox potential differences.	In order to understand the origins of differences in redox potentials among cupredoxins (small blue type I copper-containing proteins that reversibly change oxidation state and interact with redox partners), we have determined the structures of the native and two mutants (P80A and P80I) of pseudoazurin from Alcaligenes faecalis S-6 in oxidized and reduced forms at resolutions of 2.2 A in the worst case and 1.6 A in the best case. The P80A mutation creates a surface pocket filled by a new water molecule, whereas the P80I mutant excludes this water. Distinct patterns of change occur in response to reduction for all three molecules: the copper position shifts, Met 7 and Pro 35 move, and the relative orientations of residues 81 to 16, 18 to the amide planes of 77 and 86, all change. Systematic changes in the weak electrostatic interactions seen in the structures of different oxidation states can explain the Met 7/Pro 35 structural differences as well as some fluctuating solvent positions. Overall displacement parameters increase reversibly upon reduction. The reduced forms are slightly expanded over the oxidized forms. The geometries of the mutants become more trigonal in their reduced forms, consistent with higher redox potentials (+409 mV for P80A and +450 mV for P80I). Calculations of the differences in redox potentials, using POLARIS, reveal that a water unique to the P80A mutant is required (with correctly oriented hydrogens) to approximate the observed difference in redox potential. The POLARIS calculations suggest that the reduced forms are additionally stabilized through changes in the solvation of the copper center, specifically via the amides of residues 16, 39, 41, 79, and 80 which interact with either Phe 18, Met 86, or Cys 78. The redox potential of P80A is increased largely due to solvation effects, whereas the redox potential of P80I is increased largely due to geometrical effects.
9063874	Control of oxidation-reduction potentials in flavodoxin from Clostridium beijerinckii: the role of conformation changes.	X-ray analyses of wild-type and mutant flavodoxins from Clostridium beijerinckii show that the conformation of the peptide Gly57-Asp58, in a bend near the isoalloxazine ring of FMN, is correlated with the oxidation state of the FMN prosthetic group. The Gly-Asp peptide may adopt any of three conformations: trans O-up, in which the carbonyl oxygen of Gly57 (O57) points toward the flavin ring; trans O-down, in which O57 points away from the flavin; and cis O-down. Interconversions among these conformers that are linked to oxidation-reduction of the flavin can modulate the redox potentials of bound FMN. In the semiquinone and reduced forms of the protein, the Gly57-Asp58 peptide adopts the trans O-up conformation and accepts a hydrogen bond from the flavin N5H [Smith, W. W., Burnett, R. M., Darling, G. D., & Ludwig, M. L. (1977) J. Mol. Biol. 117, 195-225; Ludwig, M. L., & Luschinsky, C. L. (1992) in Chemistry and Biochemistry of Flavoenzymes III (M|ller, F., Ed.) pp 427-466, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL]. Analyses reported in this paper confirm that, in crystals of wild-type oxidized C. beijerinckii flavodoxin, the Gly57-Asp58 peptide adopts the O-down orientation and isomerizes to the cis conformation. This cis form is preferentially stabilized in the crystals by intermolecular hydrogen bonding to Asn137. Structures for the mutant Asn137Ala indicate that a mixture of all three conformers, mostly O-down, exists in oxidized C. beijerinckii flavodoxin in the absence of intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Redox potentials have been manipulated by substitutions that alter the conformational energies of the bend at 56M-G-D-E. The mutation Asp58Pro was constructed to study a case where energies for cis-trans conversion would be different from that of wild type. Intermolecular interactions with Asn137 are precluded in the crystal, yet Gly57-Pro58 is cis, and O-down, when the flavin is oxidized. Reduction of the flavin induces rearrangement to the trans O-up conformation. Redox potential shifts reflect the altered energies associated with the peptide rearrangement; E(ox/sq) decreases by approximately 60 mV (1.3 kcal/mol). Further, the results of mutation of Gly57 agree with predictions that a side chain at residue 57 should make addition of the first electron more difficult, by raising the energy of the O-up conformer that forms when the flavin is reduced to its semiquinone state. The ox/sq potentials in the mutants Gly57Ala, Gly57Asn, and Gly57Asp are all decreased by approximately 60 mV (1.3 kcal/mol). Introduction of the beta-branched threonine side chain at position 57 has much larger effects on the conformations and potentials. The Thr57-Asp58 peptide adopts a trans O-down conformation when the flavin is oxidized; upon reduction to the semiquinone, the 57-58 peptide rotates to a trans O-up conformation resembling that found in the wild-type protein. Changes in FMN-protein interactions and in conformational equilibria in G57T combine to decrease the redox potential for the ox/sq equilibrium by 180 mV (+4.0 kcal/mol) and to increase the sq/hq potential by 80 mV (-1.7 kcal/mol). A thermodynamic scheme is introduced as a framework for rationalizing the properties of wild-type flavodoxin and the effects of the mutations.
1409567	Crystal structure of the reduced form of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase refined at 2.3 A resolution.	The crystal structure of the reduced form of the enzyme p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens, complexed with its substrate p-hydroxybenzoate, has been obtained by protein X-ray crystallography. Crystals of the reduced form were prepared by soaking crystals of the oxidized enzyme-substrate complex in deaerated mother liquor containing 300-400 mM NADPH. A rapid bleaching of the crystals indicated the reduction of the enzyme-bound FAD by NADPH. This was confirmed by single crystal spectroscopy. X-ray data to 2.3 A were collected on oscillation films using a rotating anode generator as an X-ray source. After data processing and reduction, restrained least squares refinement using the 1.9 A structure of the oxidized enzyme-substrate complex as a starting model, yielded a crystallographic R-factor of 14.8% for 11,394 reflections. The final model of the reduced complex contains 3,098 protein atoms, the FAD molecule, the substrate p-hydroxybenzoate and 322 solvent molecules. The structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of the enzyme-substrate complex were found to be very similar. The root-mean-square discrepancy for all atoms between both structures was 0.38 A. The flavin ring is almost completely planar in the final model, although it was allowed to bend or twist during refinement. The observed angle between the benzene and the pyrimidine ring is 2 degrees. This value should be compared with observed values of 10 degrees for the oxidized enzyme-substrate complex and 19 degrees for the enzyme-product complex. The position of the substrate is virtually unaltered with respect to its position in the oxidized enzyme. No trace of a bound NADP+ or NADPH molecule was found.
11844799	Crystal structure of argininosuccinate synthetase from Thermus thermophilus HB8. Structural basis for the catalytic action.	Argininosuccinate synthetase catalyzes the ATP-dependent condensation of a citrulline with an aspartate to give argininosuccinate. The three-dimensional structures of the enzyme from Thermus thermophilus HB8 in its free form, complexed with intact ATP, and complexed with an ATP analogue (adenylyl imidodiphosphate) and substrate analogues (arginine and succinate) have been determined at 2.3-, 2.3-, and 1.95-A resolution, respectively. The structure is essentially the same as that of the Escherichia coli argininosuccinate synthetase. The small domain has the same fold as that of a new family of "N-type" ATP pyrophosphatases with the P-loop specific for the pyrophosphate of ATP. However, the enzyme shows the P-loop specific for the gamma-phosphate of ATP. The structure of the complex form is quite similar to that of the native one, indicating that no conformational change occurs upon the binding of ATP and the substrate analogues. ATP and the substrate analogues are bound to the active site with their reaction sites close to one another and located in a geometrical orientation favorable to the catalytic action. The reaction mechanism so far proposed seems to be consistent with the locations of ATP and the substrate analogues. The reaction may proceed without the large conformational change of the enzyme proposed for the catalytic process.
15647363	Prion protein NMR structures of elk and of mouse/elk hybrids.	The NMR structure of the recombinant elk prion protein (ePrP), which represents the cellular isoform (ePrPC) in the healthy organism, is described here. As anticipated from the highly conserved amino acid sequence, ePrPC has the same global fold as other mammalian prion proteins (PrPs), with a flexibly disordered "tail" of residues 23-124 and a globular domain 125-226 with three alpha-helices and a short antiparallel beta-sheet. However, ePrPC shows a striking local structure variation when compared with most other mammalian PrPs, in particular human, bovine, and mouse PrPC. A loop of residues 166-175, which links the beta-sheet with the alpha2-helix and is part of a hypothetical "protein X" epitope, is outstandingly well defined, whereas this loop is disordered in the other species. Based on NMR structure determinations of two mouse PrP variants, mPrP[N174T] and mPrP[S170N,N174T], this study shows that the structured loop in ePrPC relates to these two local amino acid exchanges, so that mPrP[S170N,N174T] exactly mimics ePrPC. These results are evaluated in the context of recent reports on chronic wasting disease (CWD) in captive and free-ranging deer and elk in the U.S. and Canada, and an animal model is proposed for support of future research on CWD.
11477222	Tolerance of point substitution of methionine for isoleucine in hen egg white lysozyme.	X-ray structure determination of proteins by using the multiple-wavelength anomalous dispersion method targeting selenomethionine is now widely employed. Isoleucine was examined for the second choice of the substitution of methionine next to leucine. We performed a systematic mutational study of the substitutions of methionine for isoleucine. All mutated lysozymes were less stable than the wild-type by about 1 kcal/mol and it is suggested that this instability was caused by the change in residual hydrophobicity from isoleucine to methionine. The X-ray structures of all mutant lysozymes were very similar to that of the wild-type. In addition, both the accessible surface areas and the conformation of the side chain of methionine in all mutant lysozymes were similar to those of the side chain at the respective isoleucine in the wild-type. Therefore, it is suggested that the mutation from isoleucine to methionine in a protein can be considered as a "safe" substitution.
16285725	Exploring the binding conformations of bulkier dipeptide amide inhibitors in constitutive nitric oxide synthases.	A series of L-nitroarginine-based dipeptide inhibitors are highly selective for neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) over the endothelial isoform (eNOS). Crystal structures of these dipeptides bound to both isoforms revealed two different conformations, curled in nNOS and extended in eNOS, corresponding to higher and lower binding affinity to the two isoforms, respectively. In previous studies we found that the primary reason for selectivity is that Asp597 in nNOS, which is Asn368 in eNOS, provides greater electrostatic stabilization in the inhibitor complex. While this is the case for smaller dipeptide inhibitors, electrostatic stabilization may no longer be the sole determinant for isoform selectivity with bulkier dipeptide inhibitors. Another residue farther away from the active site, Met336 in nNOS (Val106 in eNOS), is in contact with bulkier dipeptide inhibitors. Double mutants were made to exchange the D597/M336 pair in nNOS with N368/V106 in eNOS. Here we report crystal structures and inhibition constants for bulkier dipeptide inhibitors bound to nNOS and eNOS that illustrate the important role played by residues near the entry to the active site in isoform selective inhibition.
12433916	High resolution crystal structures of human Rab5a and five mutants with substitutions in the catalytically important phosphate-binding loop.	GTPase domain crystal structures of Rab5a wild type and five variants with mutations in the phosphate-binding loop are reported here at resolutions up to 1.5 A. Of particular interest, the A30P mutant was crystallized in complexes with GDP, GDP+AlF(3), and authentic GTP, respectively. The other variant crystals were obtained in complexes with a non-hydrolyzable GTP analog, GppNHp. All structures were solved in the same crystal form, providing an unusual opportunity to compare structures of small GTPases with different catalytic rates. The A30P mutant exhibits dramatically reduced GTPase activity and forms a GTP-bound complex stable enough for crystallographic analysis. Importantly, the A30P structure with bound GDP plus AlF(3) has been solved in the absence of a GTPase-activating protein, and it may resemble that of a transition state intermediate. Conformational changes are observed between the GTP-bound form and the transition state intermediate, mainly in the switch II region containing the catalytic Gln(79) residue and independent of A30P mutation-induced local alterations in the P-loop. The structures suggest an important catalytic role for a P-loop backbone amide group, which is eliminated in the A30P mutant, and support the notion that the transition state of GTPase-mediated GTP hydrolysis is of considerable dissociative character.
14500716	Involvement of the pyrophosphate and the 2'-phosphate binding regions of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase in coenzyme specificity.	Previous studies indicated that the determinants of coenzyme specificity in ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase (FNR) from Anabaena are situated in the 2'-phosphate (2'-P) NADP+ binding region, and also suggested that other regions must undergo structural rearrangements of the protein backbone during coenzyme binding. Among the residues involved in such specificity could be those located in regions where interaction with the pyrophosphate group of the coenzyme takes place, namely loops 155-160 and 261-268 in Anabaena FNR. In order to learn more about the coenzyme specificity determinants, and to better define the structural basis of coenzyme binding, mutations in the pyrophosphate and 2'-P binding regions of FNR have been introduced. Modification of the pyrophosphate binding region, involving residues Thr-155, Ala-160, and Leu-263, indicates that this region is involved in determining coenzyme specificity and that selected alterations of these positions produce FNR enzymes that are able to bind NAD+. Thus, our results suggest that slightly different structural rearrangements of the backbone chain in the pyrophosphate binding region might determine FNR specificity for the coenzyme. Combined mutations at the 2'-P binding region, involving residues Ser-223, Arg-224, Arg-233, and Tyr-235, in combination with the residues mentioned above in the pyrophosphate binding region have also been carried out in an attempt to increase the FNR affinity for NAD+/H. However, in most cases the analyzed mutants lost the ability for NADP+/H binding and electron transfer, and no major improvements were observed with regard to the efficiency of the reactions with NAD+/H. Therefore, our results confirm that determinants for coenzyme specificity in FNR are also situated in the pyrophosphate binding region and not only in the 2'-P binding region. Such observations also suggest that other regions of the protein, yet to be identified, might also be involved in this process.
10206894	Crystal structure of human ZAG, a fat-depleting factor related to MHC molecules.	Zn-alpha2-glycoprotein (ZAG) is a soluble protein that is present in serum and other body fluids. ZAG stimulates lipid degradation in adipocytes and causes the extensive fat losses associated with some advanced cancers. The 2.8 angstrom crystal structure of ZAG resembles a class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) heavy chain, but ZAG does not bind the class I light chain beta2-microglobulin. The ZAG structure includes a large groove analogous to class I MHC peptide binding grooves. Instead of a peptide, the ZAG groove contains a nonpeptidic compound that may be implicated in lipid catabolism under normal or pathological conditions.
3351945	Crystal structure of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase complexed with its reaction product 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate.	Crystals of the flavin-containing enzyme p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (PHBHase) complexed with its reaction product were investigated in order to obtain insight into the catalytic cycle of this enzyme involving two substrates and two cofactors. PHBHase was crystallized initially with its substrate, p-hydroxybenzoate and the substrate was then converted into the product 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate by allowing the catalytic reaction to proceed in the crystals. In addition, crystals were soaked in mother liquor containing a high concentration of this product. Data up to 2.3 A (1 A = 0.1 nm) were collected by the oscillation method and the structure of the enzyme product complex was refined by alternate restrained least-squares procedures and model building by computer graphics techniques. A total of 273 solvent molecules could be located, four of them being presumably sulfate ions. The R-factor for 14,339 reflections between 6.0 A and 2.3 A is 19.3%. The 3-hydroxyl group of the product introduced by the enzyme is clearly visible in the electron density, showing unambiguously which carbon atom of the substrate is hydroxylated. A clear picture of the hydroxylation site is obtained. The plane of the product is rotated 21 degrees with respect to the plane of the substrate in the current model of enzyme-substrate complex. The 4-hydroxyl group of the product is hydrogen bonded to the hydroxyl group of Tyr201, its carboxyl group is interacting with the side-chains of Tyr222, Arg214 and Ser212, while the newly introduced 3-hydroxyl group makes a hydrogen bond with the backbone carbonyl oxygen of Pro293.
710450	The role of cis-trans isomerization of peptide bonds in the coil leads to and comes from triple helix conversion of collagen.	null
40036	Crystal structure of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase.	null
9826511	Mutational destabilization of the critical interface water cluster in Scapharca dimeric hemoglobin: structural basis for altered allosteric activity.	A cluster of interface ordered water molecules has been proposed to act as a key mediator of intersubunit communication in the homodimeric hemoglobin of Scapharca inaequivalvis. Mutations of Thr72 to Val and Ile, which lack the hydroxyl group to hydrogen bond the deoxy interface water molecules, result in sharply altered functional properties. We have determined the high resolution (1.6-1. 8 A) crystal structures of these two mutants in both the deoxygenated and CO-liganded states. These structures show minimal protein structural changes relative to the same native derivatives, despite greater than 40-fold increases in oxygen affinity. In the deoxy state of both mutants two water molecules at the periphery of the water cluster are lost, and the remaining cluster water molecules are destabilized. The CO-liganded structures show key differences between the two mutants including a more optimal interface packing involving Ile72 that acts to stabilize its high affinity (R) state. This additional stabilization allows rationalization of its lowered cooperativity within the context of a two-state model. These studies support a key role of ordered water in cooperative functioning and illustrate how subtle structural alterations can result in significantly altered functional properties in an allosteric molecule.
9437427	Crystal structure of GyrA intein from Mycobacterium xenopi reveals structural basis of protein splicing.	Several genes from prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes have been found to contain an in-frame open reading frame, which encodes for an internal protein (intein). Post-translationally, the internal polypeptide auto-splices and ligates the external sequences to yield a functional external protein (extein) and an intein. Most, but not all inteins, contain, apart from a splicing domain, a separate endonucleolytic domain that enables them to maintain their presence by a homing mechanism. We report here the crystal structure of an intein found in the gyrase A subunit from Mycobacterium xenopi at 2.2 A resolution. The structure contains an unusual beta-fold with the catalytic splice junctions at the ends of two adjacent antiparallel beta-strands. The arrangement of the active site residues Ser 1, Thr 72, His 75, His 197, and Asn 198 is consistent with a four-step mechanism for the cleavage-ligation reaction. Using site-directed mutagenesis, the N-terminal cysteine, proposed as the nucleophile in the first step of the splicing reaction, was changed to a Ser 1 and Ala 0, thus capturing the intein in a pre-spliced state.
8823158	Structure and kinetics of the beta-lactamase mutants S70A and K73H from Staphylococcus aureus PC1.	Two mutant beta-lactamases from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 which probe key catalytic residues have been produced by site-directed mutagenesis. In the S70A enzyme, the nucleophilic group that attacks the beta-lactam carbonyl carbon atom was eliminated. Consequently, the kcat values for hydrolysis of benzylpenicillin and nitrocefin have been reduced by 10(4)-10(5) compared with the wild-type enzyme. The crystal structure of S70A beta-lactamase has been determined at 2.1 A resolution. With the exception of the mutation site, the structure is identical to that of the native enzyme. The residual activity is attributed either to mistranslation that leads to production of wild-type enzyme and/or to remaining features of the active site that stabilize the tetrahedral transition state. Soaking of the crystals with ampicillin or clavulanate, followed by flash-freezing, has been carried out and the structures examined at 2.0 A resolution. For both experiments, the difference electron density maps revealed buildup of density in the active site that presumably corresponds to beta-lactam binding. However, neither electron density is sufficiently clear for defining the atomic details of the bound compounds. The K73H beta-lactamase has been prepared to test the possible role of Lys73 in proton transfer. It exhibits no detectable activity toward benzylpenicillin, and 10(5)-fold reduction of kcat for nitrocefin hydrolysis compared with the wild-type enzyme. No significant recovery of activity has been measured when the pH was varied between 5.0 and 8.0. The crystal structure of K73H beta-lactamase has been determined at 1.9 A resolution. While the overall structure is similar to that of the native enzyme, the electrostatic interactions between His73 and neighboring residues indicate that the imidazole ring is positively charged. In addition, the hydroxyl group of Ser70 adopts a position that is incompatible with nucleophilic attack on substrates. A crystal soaked with ampicillin was flash-frozen, and diffraction data were collected at 2.1 A resolution. The electron density map showed no indication of substrate binding.
2010919	Reaction mechanism of alkaline phosphatase based on crystal structures. Two-metal ion catalysis.	Alkaline phosphatase (AP) is a widely distributed non-specific phosphomonoesterase that functions through formation of a covalent phosphoseryl intermediate (E-P). The enzyme also catalyzes phosphoryl transfer reaction to various alcohols. Escherichia coli AP is a homodimer with 449 residues per monomer. It is a metalloenzyme with two Zn2+ and one Mg2+ at each active site. The crystal structure of native E. coli AP complexed with inorganic phosphate (Pi), which is a strong competitive inhibitor as well as a substrate for the reverse reaction, has been refined at 2.0 A resolution. Some parts of the molecular have been retraced, starting from the previous 2.8 A study. The active site has been modified substantially and is described in this paper. The changes in the active site region suggest the need to reinterpret earlier spectral data, and suggestions are made. Also presented are the structures of the Cd-substituted enzyme complexed with inorganic phosphate at 2.5 A resolution, and the phosphate-free native enzyme at 2.8 A resolution. At pH 7.5, where the X-ray data were collected, the Cd-substituted enzyme is predominantly the covalent phosphoenzyme (E-P) while the native Zn/Mg enzyme exists in predominantly noncovalent (E.P) form. Implication of these results for the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme is discussed. APs from other sources are believed to function in a similar manner.
9295271	Structural basis for cyclic terpene biosynthesis by tobacco 5-epi-aristolochene synthase.	Terpene cyclases catalyze the synthesis of cyclic terpenes with 10-, 15-, and 20-carbon acyclic isoprenoid diphosphates as substrates. Plants have been a source of these natural products by providing a homologous set of terpene synthases. The crystal structures of 5-epi-aristolochene synthase, a sesquiterpene cyclase from tobacco, alone and complexed separately with two farnesyl diphosphate analogs were analyzed. These structures reveal an unexpected enzymatic mechanism for the synthesis of the bicyclic product, 5-epi-aristolochene, and provide a basis for understanding the stereochemical selectivity displayed by other cyclases in the biosynthesis of pharmacologically important cyclic terpenes. As such, these structures provide templates for the engineering of novel terpene cyclases.
11286890	Structures of beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase I complexed with fatty acids elucidate its catalytic machinery.	BACKGROUND: beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase (KAS) I is vital for the construction of the unsaturated fatty acid carbon skeletons characterizing E. coli membrane lipids. The new carbon-carbon bonds are created by KAS I in a Claisen condensation performed in a three-step enzymatic reaction. KAS I belongs to the thiolase fold enzymes, of which structures are known for five other enzymes. RESULTS: Structures of the catalytic Cys-Ser KAS I mutant with covalently bound C10 and C12 acyl substrates have been determined to 2.40 and 1.85 A resolution, respectively. The KAS I dimer is not changed by the formation of the complexes but reveals an asymmetric binding of the two substrates bound to the dimer. A detailed model is proposed for the catalysis of KAS I. Of the two histidines required for decarboxylation, one donates a hydrogen bond to the malonyl thioester oxo group, and the other abstracts a proton from the leaving group. CONCLUSIONS: The same mechanism is proposed for KAS II, which also has a Cys-His-His active site triad. Comparison to the active site architectures of other thiolase fold enzymes carrying out a decarboxylation step suggests that chalcone synthase and KAS III with Cys-His-Asn triads use another mechanism in which both the histidine and the asparagine interact with the thioester oxo group. The acyl binding pockets of KAS I and KAS II are so similar that they alone cannot provide the basis for their differences in substrate specificity.
8528073	Redesign of the substrate specificity of Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase to that of Escherichia coli tyrosine aminotransferase by homology modeling and site-directed mutagenesis.	Although several high-resolution X-ray crystallographic structures have been determined for Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase (eAATase), efforts to crystallize E. coli tyrosine aminotransferase (eTATase) have been unsuccessful. Sequence alignment analyses of eTATase and eAATase show 43% sequence identity and 72% sequence similarity, allowing for conservative substitutions. The high similarity of the two sequences indicates that both enzymes must have similar secondary and tertiary structures. Six active site residues of eAATase were targeted by homology modeling as being important for aromatic amino acid reactivity with eTATase. Two of these positions (Thr 109 and Asn 297) are invariant in all known aspartate aminotransferase enzymes, but differ in eTATase (Ser 109 and Ser 297). The other four positions (Val 39, Lys 41, Thr 47, and Asn 69) line the active site pocket of eAATase and are replaced by amino acids with more hydrophobic side chains in eTATase (Leu 39, Tyr 41, Ile 47, and Leu 69). These six positions in eAATase were mutated by site-directed mutagenesis to the corresponding amino acids found in eTATase in an attempt to redesign the substrate specificity of eAATase to that of eTATase. Five combinations of the individual mutations were obtained from mutagenesis reactions. The redesigned eAATase mutant containing all six mutations (Hex) displays second-order rate constants for the transamination of aspartate and phenylalanine that are within an order of magnitude of those observed for eTATase. Thus, the reactivity of eAATase with phenylalanine was increased by over three orders of magnitude without sacrificing the high transamination activity with aspartate observed for both enzymes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
15528205	Roles of distal Asp in heme oxygenase from Corynebacterium diphtheriae, HmuO: A water-driven oxygen activation mechanism.	Heme oxygenases found in mammals, plants, and bacteria catalyze degradation of heme using the same mechanism. Roles of distal Asp (Asp-136) residue in HmuO, a heme oxygenase of Corynebacterium diphtheriae, have been investigated by site-directed mutagenesis, enzyme kinetics, resonance Raman spectroscopy, and x-ray crystallography. Replacements of the Asp-136 by Ala and Phe resulted in reduced heme degradation activity due to the formation of ferryl heme, showing that the distal Asp is critical in HmuO heme oxygenase activity. D136N HmuO catalyzed heme degradation at a similar efficiency to wild type and D136E HmuO, implying that the carboxylate moiety is not required for the heme catabolism by HmuO. Resonance Raman results suggest that the inactive ferryl heme formation in the HmuO mutants is induced by disruption of the interaction between a reactive Fe-OOH species and an adjacent distal pocket water molecule. Crystal structural analysis of the HmuO mutants confirms partial disappearance of this nearby water in D136A HmuO. Our results provide the first experimental evidence for the catalytic importance of the nearby water molecule that can be universally critical in heme oxygenase catalysis and propose that the distal Asp helps in positioning the key water molecule at a position suitable for efficient activation of the Fe-OOH species.
15989951	Crystal structures of RNase H bound to an RNA/DNA hybrid: substrate specificity and metal-dependent catalysis.	RNase H belongs to a nucleotidyl-transferase superfamily, which includes transposase, retroviral integrase, Holliday junction resolvase, and RISC nuclease Argonaute. We report the crystal structures of RNase H complexed with an RNA/DNA hybrid and a mechanism for substrate recognition and two-metal-ion-dependent catalysis. RNase H specifically recognizes the A form RNA strand and the B form DNA strand. Structure comparisons lead us to predict the catalytic residues of Argonaute and conclude that two-metal-ion catalysis is a general feature of the superfamily. In nucleases, the two metal ions are asymmetrically coordinated and have distinct roles in activating the nucleophile and stabilizing the transition state. In transposases, they are symmetrically coordinated and exchange roles to alternately activate a water and a 3'-OH for successive strand cleavage and transfer by a ping-pong mechanism.
9103205	Crystal structure of the nucleotide exchange factor GrpE bound to the ATPase domain of the molecular chaperone DnaK.	The crystal structure of the adenine nucleotide exchange factor GrpE in complex with the adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) domain of Escherichia coli DnaK [heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70)] was determined at 2.8 angstrom resolution. A dimer of GrpE binds asymmetrically to a single molecule of DnaK. The structure of the nucleotide-free ATPase domain in complex with GrpE resembles closely that of the nucleotide-bound mammalian Hsp70 homolog, except for an outward rotation of one of the subdomains of the protein. This conformational change is not consistent with tight nucleotide binding. Two long alpha helices extend away from the GrpE dimer and suggest a role for GrpE in peptide release from DnaK.
8925894	Rapid estimation of relative amide proton exchange rates of 15 N-labelled proteins by a straightforward water selective NOESY-HSQC experiment.	A straightforward heteronuclear pseudo-3D NOESY-HSQC pulse sequence using radiation damping to selectively invert magnetization at the water frequency was developed to estimate the amide proton exchange rates in 15N-labelled proteins. The peak intensities in the resultant 2D spectrum allow a direct classification of amide proton exchange rates according to short (ms), intermediate (ms to s) or long (> or = s) residence times. This method was successfully used for the analysis of amide proton exchange rates in the 15N-labelled FruR DNA-binding domain and pertinent information about its dynamics was obtained.
9695947	Crystal structure of the signal sequence binding subunit of the signal recognition particle.	The crystal structure of the signal sequence binding subunit of the signal recognition particle (SRP) from Thermus aquaticus reveals a deep groove bounded by a flexible loop and lined with side chains of conserved hydrophobic residues. The groove defines a flexible, hydrophobic environment that is likely to contribute to the structural plasticity necessary for SRP to bind signal sequences of different lengths and amino acid sequence. The structure also reveals a helix-turn-helix motif containing an arginine-rich alpha helix that is required for binding to SRP RNA and is implicated in forming the core of an extended RNA binding surface.
11502177	beta-Ketoacyl-[acyl carrier protein] synthase I of Escherichia coli: aspects of the condensation mechanism revealed by analyses of mutations in the active site pocket.	beta-Ketoacyl-[acyl carrier protein (ACP)] synthase forms new carbon-carbon bonds in three steps: transfer of an acyl primer from ACP to the enzyme, decarboxylation of the elongating substrate and its condensation with the acyl primer substrate. Six residues of Escherichia coli beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase I (KAS I) implicated in these reactions were subjected to site-directed mutagenesis. Analyses of the abilities of C163A, C163S, H298A, D306A, E309A, K328A, and H333A to carry out the three reactions lead to the following conclusions. The active site Cys-163 is not required for decarboxylation, whereas His-298 and His-333 are indispensable. Neither of the histidines is essential for increasing the nucleophilicity of Cys-163 to enable transfer of the acyl primer substrate. Maintenance of the structural integrity of the active site by Asp-306 and Glu-309 is required for decarboxylation but not for transfer. One function of Lys-328 occurs very early in catalysis, potentially before transfer. These results in conjunction with structural analyses of substrate complexes have led to a model for KAS I catalysis [Olsen, J. G., Kadziola, A., von Wettstein-Knowles, P., Siggaard-Andersen, M., and Larsen, S. (2001) Structure 9, 233-243]. Another facet of catalysis revealed by the mutant analyses is that the acyl primer transfer activity of beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase I is inhibited by free ACP at physiological concentrations. Differences in the inhibitory response by individual mutant proteins indicate that interaction of free ACP with Cys-163, Asp-306, Glu-309, Lys-328, and His-333 might form a sensitive regulatory mechanism for the transfer of acyl primers.
16300397	Dissecting the roles of a strictly conserved tyrosine in substrate recognition and catalysis by pseudouridine 55 synthase.	Sequence alignment of the TruA, TruB, RsuA, and RluA families of pseudouridine synthases (PsiS) identifies a strictly conserved aspartic acid, which has been shown to be the critical nucleophile for the PsiS-catalyzed formation of pseudouridine (Psi). However, superposition of the representative structures from these four families of enzymes identifies two additional amino acids, a lysine or an arginine (K/R) and a tyrosine (Y), from a K/RxY motif that are structurally conserved in the active site. We have created a series of Thermotoga maritima and Escherichia coli pseudouridine 55 synthase (Psi55S) mutants in which the conserved Y is mutated to other amino acids. A new crystal structure of the T. maritima Psi55S Y67F mutant in complex with a 5FU-RNA at 2.4 A resolution revealed formation of 5-fluoro-6-hydroxypseudouridine (5FhPsi), the same product previously seen in wild-type Psi55S-5FU-RNA complex structures. HPLC analysis confirmed efficient formation of 5FhPsi by both Psi55S Y67F and Y67L mutants but to a much lesser extent by the Y67A mutant when 5FU-RNA substrate was used. However, both HPLC analysis and a tritium release assay indicated that these mutants had no detectable enzymatic activity when the natural RNA substrate was used. The combined structural and mutational studies lead us to propose that the side chain of the conserved tyrosine in these four families of PsiS plays a dual role within the active site, maintaining the structural integrity of the active site through its hydrophobic phenyl ring and acting as a general base through its OH group for the proton abstraction required in the last step of PsiS-catalyzed formation of Psi.
1896431	The crystal structure of staphylococcal nuclease refined at 1.7 A resolution.	The crystal structure of staphylococcal nuclease has been determined to 1.7 A resolution with a final R-factor of 16.2% using stereochemically restrained Hendrickson-Konnert least-squares refinement. The structure reveals a number of conformational changes relative to the structure of the ternary complex of staphylococcal nuclease 1,2 bound with deoxythymidine-3',5'-diphosphate and Ca2+. Tyr-113 and Tyr-115, which pack against the nucleotide base in the nuclease complex, are rotated outward creating a more open binding pocket in the absence of nucleotide. The side chains of Ca2+ ligands Asp-21 and Asp-40 shift as does Glu-43, the proposed general base in the hydrolysis of the 5'-phosphodiester bond. The significance of some changes in the catalytic site is uncertain due to the intrusion of a symmetry related Lys-70 side chain which hydrogen bonds to both Asp-21 and Glu-43. The position of a flexible loop centered around residue 50 is altered, most likely due to conformational changes propagated from the Ca2+ site. The side chains of Arg-35, Lys-84, Tyr-85, and Arg-87, which hydrogen bond to the 3'- and 5'-phosphates of the nucleotide in the nuclease complex, are unchanged in conformation, with packing interactions with adjacent protein side chains sufficient to fix the geometry in the absence of ligand. The nuclease structure presented here, in combination with the stereochemically restrained refinement of the nuclease complex structure at 1.65 A, provides a wealth of structural information for the increasing number of studies using staphylococcal nuclease as a model system of protein structure and function.
7651351	alpha-Conotoxin ImI exhibits subtype-specific nicotinic acetylcholine receptor blockade: preferential inhibition of homomeric alpha 7 and alpha 9 receptors.	Through a study of cloned nicotinic receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes, we provide evidence that alpha-conotoxin ImI, a peptide marine snail toxin that induces seizures in rodents, selectively blocks subtypes of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. alpha-Conotoxin ImI blocks homomeric alpha 7 nicotinic receptors with the highest apparent affinity and homomeric alpha 9 receptors with 8-fold lower affinity. This toxin has no effect on receptors composed of alpha 2 beta 2, alpha 3 beta 2, alpha 4 beta 2, alpha 2 beta 4, alpha 3 beta 4, or alpha 4 beta 4 subunit combinations. In contrast to alpha-bungarotoxin, which has high affinity for alpha 7, alpha 9, and alpha 1 beta 1 gamma delta receptors, alpha-conotoxin ImI has low affinity for the muscle nAChR. Related Conus peptides, alpha-conotoxins MI and GI, exhibit a distinct specificity, strictly targeting the muscle subtype receptor but not alpha 7 or alpha 9 receptors. alpha-Conotoxins thus represent selective tools for the study of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
15610006	Enhancing the activity of insulin at the receptor interface: crystal structure and photo-cross-linking of A8 analogues.	The receptor-binding surface of insulin is broadly conserved, reflecting its evolutionary optimization. Neighboring positions nevertheless offer an opportunity to enhance activity, through either transmitted structural changes or introduction of novel contacts. Nonconserved residue A8 is of particular interest as Thr(A8) --> His substitution (a species variant in birds and fish) augments the potency of human insulin. Diverse A8 substitutions are well tolerated, suggesting that the hormone-receptor interface is not tightly packed at this site. To resolve whether enhanced activity is directly or indirectly mediated by the variant A8 side chain, we have determined the crystal structure of His(A8)-insulin and investigated the photo-cross-linking properties of an A8 analogue containing p-azidophenylalanine. The structure, characterized as a T(3)R(3)(f) zinc hexamer at 1.8 A resolution, is essentially identical to that of native insulin. The photoactivatable analogue exhibits efficient cross-linking to the insulin receptor. The site of cross-linking lies within a 14 kDa C-terminal domain of the alpha-subunit. This contact, to our knowledge the first to be demonstrated from the A chain, is inconsistent with a recent model of the hormone-receptor complex derived from electron microscopy. Optimizing the binding interaction of a nonconserved side chain on the surface of insulin may thus enhance its activity.
15166214	Cross-talk between thiamin diphosphate binding and phosphorylation loop conformation in human branched-chain alpha-keto acid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase.	The decarboxylase/dehydrogenase (E1b) component of the 4-megadalton human branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKD) metabolic machine is a thiamin diphosphate (ThDP)-dependent enzyme with a heterotetrameric cofactor-binding fold. The E1b component catalyzes the decarboxylation of alpha-keto acids and the subsequent reductive acylation of the lipoic acid-bearing domain (LBD) from the 24-meric transacylase (E2b) core. In the present study, we show that the binding of cofactor ThDP to the E1b active site induces a disorder-to-order transition of the conserved phosphorylation loop carrying the two phosphorylation sites Ser(292)-alpha and Ser(302)-alpha, as deduced from the 1.80-1.85 A apoE1b and holoE1b structures. The induced loop conformation is essential for the recognition of lipoylated LBD to initiate E1b-catalyzed reductive acylation. Alterations of invariant Arg(287)-alpha, Asp(295)-alpha, Tyr(300)-alpha, and Arg(301)-alpha that form a hydrogen-bonding network in the phosphorylation loop result in the disordering of the loop conformation as elucidated by limited proteolysis, accompanied by the impaired binding and diminished reductive acylation of lipoylated LBD. In contrast, k(cat) values for E1b-catalyzed decarboxylation of the alpha-keto acid are higher in these E1b mutants than in wild-type E1b, with higher K(m) values for the substrate in the mutants. ThDP binding that orders the loop prevents phosphorylation of E1b by the BCKD kinase and averts the inactivation of wild-type E1b, but not the above mutants, by this covalent modification. Our results establish that the cross-talk between the bound ThDP and the phosphorylation loop conformation serves as a feed-forward switch for multiple reaction steps in the BCKD metabolic machine.
12424132	Ramachandran plot on the web.	A graphics package has been developed to display the main chain torsion angles phi, psi (phi, Psi); (Ramachandran angles) in a protein of known structure. In addition, the package calculates the Ramachandran angles at the central residue in the stretch of three amino acids having specified the flanking residue types. The package displays the Ramachandran angles along with a detailed analysis output. This software is incorporated with all the protein structures available in the Protein Databank.
15591246	Tyr702 is an important determinant of agonist binding and domain closure of the ligand-binding core of GluR2.	Ionotropic glutamate receptors mediate most rapid excitatory synaptic transmission in the mammalian central nervous system, and their involvement in neurological diseases has stimulated widespread interest in their structure and function. Despite a large number of agonists developed so far, few display selectivity among (S)-2-amino-3-(3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazol-4-yl) propionic acid (AMPA)-receptor subtypes. The present study provides X-ray structures of the glutamate receptor 2 (GluR2)-selective partial agonist (S)-2-amino-3-(1,3,5,6,7-pentahydro-2,4-dioxocyclopenta[e] pyrimidin-1-yl) propanoic acid [(S)-CPW399] in complex with the ligand-binding core of GluR2 (GluR2-S1S2J) and with a (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J mutant. In addition, the structure of the nonselective partial agonist kainate in complex with (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J was determined. The results show that the selectivity of (S)-CPW399 toward full-length GluR2 relative to GluR3 is reflected in the binding data on the two soluble constructs, allowing the use of (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J as a model system for studying GluR2/GluR3 selectivity. Structural comparisons suggest that selectivity arises from disruption of a water-mediated network between ligand and receptor. A D1-D2 domain closure occurs upon agonist binding. (S)-CPW399 and kainate induce greater domain closure in the Y702F mutant, indicating that these partial agonists here act in a manner more reminiscent of full agonists. Both kainate and (S)-CPW399 exhibited higher efficacy at (Y702F)GluR2(Q)i than at wild-type GluR2(Q)i. Whereas an excellent correlation exists between domain closure and efficacy of a range of agonists at full-length GluR2 determined by electrophysiology in Xenopus laevis oocytes, a direct correlation between agonist induced domain closure of (Y702F)GluR2-S1S2J and efficacy at the GluR3 receptor is not observed. Although it clearly controls selectivity, mutation of this residue alone is insufficient to explain agonist-induced conformational rearrangements occurring in this variant.
10387007	Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase: implications of crystallographic analyses of the native, mutant, and inhibited enzymes for the mechanism of catalysis.	By improving the expression and purification of Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase (eMetAP) and using slightly different crystallization conditions, the resolution of the parent structure was extended from 2.4 to 1.9 A resolution. This has permitted visualization of the coordination geometry and solvent structure of the active-site dinuclear metal center. One solvent molecule (likely a mu-hydroxide) bridges the trigonal bipyramidal (Co1) and octahedral (Co2) cobalt ions. A second solvent (possibly a hydroxide ion) is bound terminally to Co2. A monovalent cation binding site was also identified about 13 A away from the metal center at an interface between the two subdomains of the protein. The first structure of a substrate-like inhibitor, (3R)-amino-(2S)-hydroxyheptanoyl-L-Ala-L-Leu-L-Val-L-Phe-OMe, bound to a methionine aminopeptidase, has also been determined. This inhibitor coordinates the metal center through four interactions as follows: (i) ligation of the N-terminal (3R)-nitrogen to Co2, (ii, iii) bridging coordination of the (2S)-hydroxyl group, and (iv) terminal ligation to Co1 by the keto oxygen of the pseudo-peptide linkage. Inhibitor binding occurs with the displacement of two solvent ligands and the expansion of the coordination sphere of Co1. In addition to the tetradentate, bis-chelate metal coordination, the substrate analogue forms hydrogen bonds with His79 and His178, two conserved residues within the active site of all MetAPs. To evaluate their importance in catalysis His79 and His178 were replaced with alanine. Both substitutions, but especially that of His79, reduce activity. The structure of the His79Ala apoenzyme and the comparison of its electronic absorption spectra with other variants suggest that the loss in activity is not due to a conformational change or a defective metal center. Two different reaction mechanisms are proposed and are compared to those of related enzymes. These results also suggest that inhibitors analogous to that reported here may be useful in preventing angiogenesis in cancer and in the treatment of microbial and fungal infections.
12441390	Crystal structures and increased stabilization of the protein G variants with switched folding pathways NuG1 and NuG2.	We recently described two protein G variants (NuG1 and NuG2) with redesigned first hairpins that were almost twice as stable, folded 100-fold faster, and had a switched folding mechanism relative to the wild-type protein. To test the structural accuracy of our design algorithm and to provide insights to the dramatic changes in the kinetics and thermodynamics of folding, we have now determined the crystal structures of NuG1 and NuG2 to 1.8 A and 1.85 A, respectively. We find that they adopt hairpin structures that are closer to the computational models than to wild-type protein G; the RMSD of the NuG1 hairpin to the design model and the wild-type structure are 1.7 A and 5.1 A, respectively. The crystallographic B factor in the redesigned first hairpin of NuG1 is systematically higher than the second hairpin, suggesting that the redesigned region is somewhat less rigid. A second round of structure-based design yielded new variants of NuG1 and NuG2, which are further stabilized by 0.5 kcal/mole and 0.9 kcal/mole.
9430701	Crystal structure of a calcium-phospholipid binding domain from cytosolic phospholipase A2.	Cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) is a calcium-sensitive 85-kDa enzyme that hydrolyzes arachidonic acid-containing membrane phospholipids to initiate the biosynthesis of eicosanoids and platelet-activating factor, potent inflammatory mediators. The calcium-dependent activation of the enzyme is mediated by an N-terminal C2 domain, which is responsible for calcium-dependent translocation of the enzyme to membranes and that enables the intact enzyme to hydrolyze membrane-resident substrates. The 2.4-A x-ray crystal structure of this C2 domain was solved by multiple isomorphous replacement and reveals a beta-sandwich with the same topology as the C2 domain from phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C delta 1. Two clusters of exposed hydrophobic residues surround two adjacent calcium binding sites. This region, along with an adjoining strip of basic residues, appear to constitute the membrane binding motif. The structure provides a striking insight into the relative importance of hydrophobic and electrostatic components of membrane binding for cPLA2. Although hydrophobic interactions predominate for cPLA2, for other C2 domains such as in "conventional" protein kinase C and synaptotagmins, electrostatic forces prevail.
15465054	Structures of unliganded and inhibitor complexes of W168F, a Loop6 hinge mutant of Plasmodium falciparum triosephosphate isomerase: observation of an intermediate position of loop6.	The enzymatic reaction of triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) is controlled by the movement of a loop (loop6, residues 166-176). Crystal structures of TIMs from a variety of sources have revealed that the loop6, which is in an open conformation in the unliganded enzyme, adopts a closed conformation in inhibitor complexes. In contrast, structures with loop open conformation are obtained in most of the complexes of TIM from the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum (PfTIM). W168 is a conserved N-terminal hinge residue, involved in different sets of interactions in the "open" and "closed" forms of loop6. The role of W168 in determining the loop conformation was examined by structural studies on the mutant W168F and its complexes with ligands. The three-dimensional structures of unliganded mutant (1.8 A) and complexes with sulfate (2.8 A) and glycerol-2-phosphate (G2P) (2.8 A) have been determined. Loop6 was found disordered in these structures, reflecting the importance of W168 in stabilizing either the open or the closed states. Critical sequence differences between the Plasmodium enzyme and other TIMs may influence the equilibrium between the closed and open forms. Examination of the environment of the loop6 shows that its propensity for the open or the closed forms is influenced not only by Phe96 as suggested earlier, but also by Asn233, which occurs in the vicinity of the active site. This residue is Gly in the other TIM sequences and probably plays a crucial role in the mode of ligand binding, which in turn affects the loop opening/closing process in PfTIM.
11738044	The structure of the feruloyl esterase module of xylanase 10B from Clostridium thermocellum provides insights into substrate recognition.	BACKGROUND: Degradation of the plant cell wall requires the synergistic action of a consortium of predominantly modular enzymes. In Clostridiae, these biocatalysts are organized into a supramolecular assembly termed a "cellulosome." This multienzyme complex possesses, in addition to its well-described cellulolytic activity, an apparatus specific for xylan degradation. Cinnamic acid esterases hydrolyze the ferulate groups involved in the crosslinking of arabinoxylans to lignin and thus play a key role in the degradation of the plant cell wall in addition to having promising industrial and medical applications. RESULTS: We have cloned and overexpressed the feruloyl esterase module from a 5 domain xylanase, Xyn10B from Clostridium thermocellum. The native structure at 1.6 A resolution has been solved with selenomethionine multiple wavelength anomalous dispersion and refined to a final R(free) of 17.8%. The structure of a hydrolytically inactive mutant, S954A, in complex with the reaction product ferulic acid has been refined at a resolution of 1.4 A with an R(free) of 16.0%. CONCLUSIONS: The C. thermocellum Xyn10B ferulic acid esterase displays the alpha/beta-hydrolase fold and possesses a classical Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad. Ferulate esterases are characterized by their specificity, and the active center reveals the binding site for ferulic acid and related compounds. Ferulate binds in a small surface depression that possesses specificity determinants for both the methoxy and hydroxyl ring substituents of the substrate. There appears to be a lack of specificity for the xylan backbone, which may reflect the intrinsic chemical heterogeneity of the natural substrate.
15837192	Crystallographic evidence for substrate-assisted GTP hydrolysis by a small GTP binding protein.	GTP hydrolysis by small GTP binding proteins of the Ras superfamily is a universal reaction that controls multiple cellular regulations. Its enzymic mechanism has been the subject of long-standing debates as to the existence/identity of the general base and the electronic nature of its transition state. Here we report the high-resolution crystal structure of a small GTP binding protein, Rab11, solved in complex with GDP and Pi. Unexpectedly, a Pi oxygen and the GDP-cleaved oxygen are located less than 2.5 A apart, suggesting that they share a proton, likely in the form of a low-barrier hydrogen bond. This implies that the gamma-phosphate of GTP was protonated; hence, that GTP acts as a general base. Furthermore, this interaction should establish at, and stabilize, the transition state. Altogether, we propose a revised model for the GTPase reaction that should reconcile earlier models into a unique substrate-assisted mechanism.
15388918	Use of an ion-binding site to bypass the 1000-atom limit to structure determination by direct methods.	Proteins with more than 1000 non-H atoms and without heavy-atom prosthetic groups are very difficult to solve by ab initio direct methods. T4 lysozyme is being used to explore these limits. The protein has 1309 non-H atoms, seven S atoms, no disulfide bonds and no heavy-atom prosthetic group. It is recalcitrant to structure determination by direct methods using X-ray diffraction data to 0.97 A. It is shown here that it is possible to obtain a truly ab initio structure determination of a variant of the protein that has an Rb+ (Z = 37) binding site. Using diffraction data to 1.06 A resolution, the direct-methods programs SIR2002 and ACORN independently solved the structure in about 20 h. The bound Rb+, which contributes about 1.7% of the total scattering, does not appear to distort the structure or to inhibit refinement (R factor 12.1%). The phases obtained via SIR2002 or ACORN are in good agreement with those from a reference structure obtained from conventional molecular-substitution and refinement procedures (average error in the figure-of-merit-weighted phases of less than 25 degrees). Thus, proteins with more than 1000 atoms that include halide-binding or other such sites may be amenable to structure determination by ab initio direct methods. The direct-methods approaches are also compared with structure determination via use of the anomalous scattering of the Rb+ ion. As shown by examples, high-resolution structures determined by direct methods can be useful in highlighting regions of strain in the protein, including short hydrogen bonds and non-planar peptide groups.
15381425	The crystal structure of an EST2 mutant unveils structural insights on the H group of the carboxylesterase/lipase family.	Esterase 2 (EST2) from the thermophilic eubacterium Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius is a thermostable serine hydrolase belonging to the H group of the esterase/lipase family. This enzyme hydrolyzes monoacylesters of different acyl-chain length and various compounds with industrial interest. EST2 displays an optimal temperature at 70 degrees C and maximal activity with pNP-esters having acyl-chain bearing from six to eight carbon atoms. EST2 mutants with different substrate specificity were also designed, generated by site-directed mutagenesis, and biochemically characterized. To better define at structural level the enzyme reaction mechanism, a crystallographic analysis of one of these mutants, namely M211S/R215L, was undertaken. Here we report its three-dimensional structure at 2.10A resolution. Structural analysis of the enzyme revealed an unexpected dimer formation as a consequence of a domain-swapping event involving its N-terminal region. This phenomenon was absent in the case of the enzyme bound to an irreversible inhibitor having optimal substrate structural features. A detailed comparison of the enzyme structures before and following binding to this molecule showed a movement of the N-terminal helices resulting from a trans-cis isomerization of the F37-P38 peptide bond. These findings suggest that this carboxylesterase presents two distinct structural arrangements reminiscent of the open and closed forms already reported for lipases. Potential biological implications associated with the observed quaternary reorganization are here discussed in light of the biochemical properties of other lipolytic members of the H group.
12595710	Crystallization and initial X-ray diffraction of BtuB, the integral membrane cobalamin transporter of Escherichia coli.	BtuB, the cobalamin transporter from Escherichia coli, has been overexpressed, purified and crystallized. The purified protein was solubilized in n-octyl tetraoxyethylene (C(8)E(4)) and was crystallized using sitting-drop vapor diffusion with PEG 3350 and magnesium acetate as precipitants (pH 6.5). Two crystal forms have been obtained. Crystal type I belongs to space group P3(1)21, with unit-cell parameters a = b = 81.6, c = 210.0 A, alpha = beta = 90, gamma = 120 degrees. Crystal type II belongs to space group P3(1)21, with unit-cell parameters a = b = 81.6, c = 226.0 A, alpha = beta = 90, gamma = 120 degrees. Each crystal form contains a monomer in the asymmetric unit. Diffraction for crystal type I extends to 2.0 A and diffraction for crystal type II extends to 2.7 A. Both crystal forms are suitable for structure determination.
15351654	Structure of the constitutively active double mutant CheYD13K Y106W alone and in complex with a FliM peptide.	CheY is a member of the response regulator protein superfamily that controls the chemotactic swimming response of motile bacteria. The CheY double mutant D13K Y106W (CheY**) is resistant to phosphorylation, yet is a highly effective mimic of phosphorylated CheY in vivo and in vitro. The conformational attributes of this protein that enable it to signal in a phosphorylation-independent manner are unknown. We have solved the crystal structure of selenomethionine-substituted CheY** in the presence of its target, a peptide (FliM16) derived from the flagellar motor switch, FliM, to 1.5A resolution with an R-factor of 19.6%. The asymmetric unit contains four CheY** molecules, two with FliM16 bound, and two without. The two CheY** molecules in the asymmetric unit that are bound to FliM16 adopt a conformation similar to BeF3- -activated wild-type CheY, and also bind FliM16 in a nearly identical manner. The CheY** molecules that do not bind FliM16 are found in a conformation similar to unphosphorylated wild-type CheY, suggesting that the active phenotype of this mutant is enabled by a facile interconversion between the active and inactive conformations. Finally, we propose a ligand-binding model for CheY and CheY**, in which Ile95 changes conformation in a Tyr/Trp106-dependent manner to accommodate FliM.
10669613	Solution structure and dynamics of the Rous sarcoma virus capsid protein and comparison with capsid proteins of other retroviruses.	The solution structure and dynamics of the recombinant 240 amino acid residue capsid protein from the Rous sarcoma virus has been determined by NMR methods. The structure was determined using 2200 distance restraints and 330 torsion angle restraints, and the dynamics analysis was based on (15)N relaxation parameters (R(1), R(2), and (1)H-(15)N NOE) measured for 153 backbone amide groups. The monomeric protein consists of independently folded N- and C-terminal domains that comprise residues Leu14-Leu146 and Ala150-Gln226, respectively. The domains exhibit different rotational correlation times (16.6(+/-0.1) ns and 12.6(+/-0.1) ns, respectively), are connected by a flexible linker (Ala147-Pro149), and do not give rise to inter-domain NOE values, indicating that they are dynamically independent. Despite limited sequence similarity, the structure of the Rous sarcoma virus capsid protein is similar to the structures determined recently for the capsid proteins of retroviruses belonging to the lentivirus and human T-cell leukemia virus/bovine leukemia virus genera. Structural differences that exist in the C-terminal domain of Rous sarcoma virus capsid relative to the other capsid proteins appear to be related to the occurrence of conserved cysteine residues. Whereas most genera of retroviruses contain a pair of conserved and essential cysteine residues in the C-terminal domain that appear to function by forming an intramolecular disulfide bond during assembly, the Rous sarcoma virus capsid protein does not. Instead, the Rous sarcoma virus capsid protein contains a single cysteine residue that appears to be conserved among the avian C-type retroviruses and is positioned in a manner that might allow the formation of an intermolecular disulfide bond during capsid assembly.
9281429	Crystal structures of a mutant maltotetraose-forming exo-amylase cocrystallized with maltopentaose.	The three-dimensional structures of the catalytic residue Glu219-->Gln mutant of Pseudomonas stutzeri maltotetraose-forming exo-alpha-amylase, and its complex with carbohydrate obtained by cocrystallization with maltopentaose were determined. Two crystal forms were obtained for the complexed enzyme, and a bound maltotetraose was found in each. The structures were analyzed at 2.2 A and 1.9 A resolution, respectively for the uncomplexed and complexed mutant. These structures were compared with the wild-type enzyme structure. In the complexed crystals, the maltotetraose was firmly bound, extensively interacting with the amino acid environments in the active cleft. The non-reducing end glucose unit was hydrogen bonded to the side-chain of Asp160 and the main-chain nitrogen of Gly158, which seem to be predominantly required for the recognition of the non-reducing end of the substrate that determines the exo-wise degradation of this enzyme. The reducing end glucose unit of bound maltotetraose showed clear deformation, adopting a half-chair conformation with extensive hydrogen bonds to surrounding polypeptides. The C1-atom of this deformed glucose unit lies very close to Asp193OD1 with a distance of 2.6 A. The catalytic residue Asp294 is firmly hydrogen-bonded to the O2 and O3-hydroxyl groups of the deformed reducing end glucose unit. Upon binding of the carbohydrate, small but significant induced fits were observed in the regions of Asp294, Phe156, Ile157, and Asp160. Possible roles of the three catalytic residues are also discussed.
8515471	Crystals of human growth hormone-receptor complexes. Extracellular domains of the growth hormone and prolactin receptors and a hormone mutant designed to prevent receptor dimerization.	A single-site human growth hormone mutant (hGH[G120R]), which inhibits receptor dimerization, was used to produce single crystals, suitable for high-resolution diffraction studies, of 1:1 complexes with the ligand-binding domain of the growth hormone receptor (hGHbp) and of the prolactin receptor (hPRLbp). Crystals of the hGH[G120R]-hGHbp complex are in space group P4(1)2(1)2 or P4(3)2(1)2 with a = 67.7 A, c = 228.0 A, and diffract to at least 2.2 A. Crystals of the complex between hGH[G120R] and hPRLbp are in space group P2(1)2(1)2 with a = 154.0 A, b = 68.4 A, c = 42.9 A, and diffract to at least 2.8 A. The structures of these two complexes will shed light on the early events in receptor activation, and provide the basis for an analysis of receptor specificity of growth hormone and prolactin.
15554622	Observation of an unprecedented Cu Bis-His site: crystal structure of the H129V mutant of nitrite reductase.	Copper nitrite reductases contain both an electron-transfer type 1 Cu site and a catalytic type 2 Cu site. We have mutated one of the type 2 copper ligating histidines to observe the effect on catalytic turnover. This mutation has created a unique site where Cu is ligated by 2 His Nepsilon2 atoms alone.
15210359	Concerted structural changes in the peptidase and the propeller domains of prolyl oligopeptidase are required for substrate binding.	Prolyl oligopeptidase contains a peptidase domain and its catalytic triad is covered by the central tunnel of a seven-bladed beta-propeller. This domain makes the enzyme an oligopeptidase by excluding large structured peptides from the active site. The apparently rigid crystal structure does not explain how the substrate can approach the catalytic groups. Two possibilities of substrate access were investigated: either blades 1 and 7 of the propeller domain move apart, or the peptidase and/or propeller domains move to create an entry site at the domain interface. Engineering disulfide bridges to the expected oscillating structures prevented such movements, which destroyed the catalytic activity and precluded substrate binding. This indicated that concerted movements of the propeller and the peptidase domains are essential for the enzyme action.
14645372	Structural basis for the coordinated regulation of transglutaminase 3 by guanine nucleotides and calcium/magnesium.	Transglutaminase 3 (TGase 3) is a member of a family of Ca2+-dependent enzymes that catalyze covalent cross-linking reactions between proteins or peptides. TGase 3 isoform is widely expressed and is important for effective epithelial barrier formation in the assembly of the cell envelope. Among the nine TGase enzyme isoforms known in the human genome, only TGase 2 is known to bind and hydrolyze GTP to GDP; binding GTP inhibits its transamidation activity but allows it to function in signal transduction. Here we present biochemical and crystallographic evidence for the direct binding of GTP/GDP to the active TGase 3 enzyme, and we show that the TGase 3 enzyme undergoes a GTPase cycle. The crystal structures of active TGase 3 with guanosine 5'-O-(thiotriphosphate) (GTPgammaS) and GDP were determined to 2.1 and 1.9 A resolution, respectively. These studies reveal for the first time the reciprocal actions of Ca2+ and GTP with respect to TGase 3 activity. GTPgammaS binding is coordinated with the replacement of a bound Ca2+ with Mg2+ and conformational rearrangements that together close a central channel to the active site. Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP results in two stable conformations, resembling both the GTP state and the non-nucleotide bound state, the latter of which allows substrate access to the active site.
11310979	Preliminary crystallographic studies of Y25F mutant of periplasmic Escherichia coli L-asparaginase.	Periplasmic Escherichia coli L-asparaginase II with Y25F mutation in the active-site cavity has been obtained by recombinant techniques. The protein was crystallized in a new hexagonal form (P6(5)22). Single crystals of this polymorph, suitable for X-ray diffraction, were obtained by vapor diffusion using 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol as precipitant (pH 4.8). The crystals are characterized by a = 81.0, c = 341.1 A and diffract to 2.45 A resolution. The asymmetric unit contains two protein molecules arranged into an AB dimer. The physiologically relevant ABA'B' homotetramer is generated by the action of the crystallographic 2-fold axis along [1, -1, 0]. Kinetic studies show that the loss of the phenolic hydroxyl group at position 25 brought about by the replacement of Y with F strongly impairs kcat without significantly affecting Km.
9699637	Obligatory steps in protein folding and the conformational diversity of the transition state.	We have analyzed the existence of obligatory steps in the folding reaction of the alpha-spectrin SH3 domain by mutating Asp 48 (D48G), which is at position i+3 of an isolated two-residue type II' beta-turn. Calorimetry and X-ray analysis show an entropic stabilizing effect resulting from local changes at the dihedral angles of the beta-turn. Kinetic analysis of D48G shows that this beta-turn is fully formed in the transition state, while there is no evidence of its formation in an isolated fragment. Introduction of several mutations in the D48G protein reveals that the local stabilization has not significantly altered the transition state ensemble. All these results, together with previous analysis of other alpha-spectrin and src SH3 mutants, indicate that: (i) in the folding reaction there could be obligatory steps which are not necessarily part of the folding nucleus; (ii) transition state ensembles in beta-sheet proteins could be quite defined and conformationally restricted ('mechanic folding nucleus'); and (iii) transition state ensembles in some proteins could be evolutionarily conserved.
10903949	Insights into molybdenum cofactor deficiency provided by the crystal structure of the molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MoaC.	BACKGROUND: The molybdenum cofactor (Moco) is an essential component of a large family of enzymes involved in important transformations in carbon, nitrogen and sulfur metabolism. The Moco biosynthetic pathway is evolutionarily conserved and found in archaea, eubacteria and eukaryotes. In humans, genetic deficiencies of enzymes involved in this pathway trigger an autosomal recessive and usually deadly disease with severe neurological symptoms. The MoaC protein, together with the MoaA protein, is involved in the first step of Moco biosynthesis. RESULTS: MoaC from Escherichia coli has been expressed and purified to homogeneity and its crystal structure determined at 2 A resolution. The enzyme is organized into a tightly packed hexamer with 32 symmetry. The monomer consists of an antiparallel, four-stranded beta sheet packed against two long alpha helices, and its fold belongs to the ferredoxin-like family. Analysis of structural and biochemical data strongly suggests that the active site is located at the interface of two monomers in a pocket that contains several strictly conserved residues. CONCLUSIONS: Asp128 in the putative active site appears to be important for catalysis as its replacement with alanine almost completely abolishes protein activity. The structure of the Asp128-->Ala variant reveals substantial conformational changes in an adjacent loop. In the human MoaC ortholog, substitution of Thr182 with proline causes Moco deficiency, and the corresponding substitution in MoaC severely compromises activity. This residue is located near the N-terminal end of helix alpha4 at an interface between two monomers. The MoaC structure provides a framework for the analysis of additional dysfunctional mutations in the corresponding human gene.
7060551	Glutathione reductase from human erythrocytes. The sequences of the NADPH domain and of the interface domain.	1. Sequence analysis of the NADPH domain (residues 158--293) and of the interface domain (365--478) was based on 12 CNBr fragments, which were isolated using ion-exchange chromatography and paper methods. Fragments with more than 15 residues were digested further with trypsin and chymotrypsin. The isolated peptides were sequenced by automated solid-phase Edman degradation. All sequenced peptides were ordered and overlapped by computerized comparisons with a complete sequence guessed from the electron density map of the protein. In the case of short CNBr fragments, this alignment was confirmed by the sequence analysis of protein fragments resulting from incomplete CNBr cleavage. 2. In the NADPH domain, residue 197, which is involved in an induced-fit mechanism, was identified as a tyrosine. The structure of the NADPH domain is probably homologous with the NAD domain of lipoamide dehydrogenase and with the FAD domain of several proteins, but not with NADPH domains of known chain-fold in other proteins. 3. The paper completes the sequence analysis of glutathione reductase so that the enzyme is now known in atomic detail. The numbering scheme of the chemically determined sequence will be used henceforth in crystallographic studies also. As inferred from the sequence data each of the two identical chains contains 478 amino acid residues, the composition being Cys10, Asp21, Asn17, Thr31, Ser31, Glu29, Gln11, Pro24, Gly43, Ala42, Val44, Met15, Ile29, Leu34, Tyr13, Phe14, Lys34, His16. Arg17, and Trp3. From these data an Mr of 2 x 51 600 was calculated for the FAD-free apoenzyme and an Mr of 2 x 42 400 for the holoenzyme.
7664726	Crystal structure of the phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C from Bacillus cereus in complex with myo-inositol.	Phosphatidylinositol (PI), once regarded as an obscure component of membranes, is now recognized as an important reservoir of second messenger precursors and as an anchor for membrane enzymes. PI-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) is the enzyme that cleaves PI, invoking numerous cellular responses. The crystal structure of PI-PLC from Bacillus cereus (EC 3.1.4.10) has been solved at 2.6 A resolution and refined to a crystallographic R factor of 18.7%. The structure consists of an imperfect (beta alpha)8-barrel similar to that first observed for triose phosphate isomerase and does not resemble any other known phospholipase structure. The active site of the enzyme has been identified by determining the structure of PI-PLC in complex with its inhibitor, myo-inositol, at 2.6 A resolution (R factor = 19.5%). This substrate-like inhibitor interacts with a number of residues highly conserved among prokaryotic PI-PLCs. Residues His32 and His82, which are also conserved between prokaryotic and eukaryotic PI-PLCs, most likely act as general base and acid respectively in a catalytic mechanism analogous to that observed for ribonucleases.
10966642	Structural basis of dimerization, coactivator recognition and MODY3 mutations in HNF-1alpha.	Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) results from mutations in the transcriptional activator hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). Several MODY3 mutations target the HNF-1alpha dimerization domain (HNF-p1), which binds the coactivator, dimerization cofactor of HNF-1 (DCoH). To define the mechanism of coactivator recognition and the basis for the MODY3 phenotype, we determined the cocrystal structure of the DCoH-HNF-p1 complex and characterized biochemically the effects of MODY3 mutations in HNF-p1. The DCoH-HNF-p1 complex comprises a dimer of dimers in which HNF-p1 forms a unique four-helix bundle. Through rearrangements of interfacial side chains, a single, bifunctional interface in the DCoH dimer mediates both HNF-1alpha binding and formation of a competing, transcriptionally inactive DCoH homotetramer. Consistent with the structure, MODY3 mutations in HNF-p1 reduce activator function by two distinct mechanisms.
12746447	Crystal structure of the tRNA processing enzyme RNase PH from Aquifex aeolicus.	RNase PH is one of the exoribonucleases that catalyze the 3' end processing of tRNA in bacteria. RNase PH removes nucleotides following the CCA sequence of tRNA precursors by phosphorolysis and generates mature tRNAs with amino acid acceptor activity. In this study, we determined the crystal structure of Aquifex aeolicus RNase PH bound with a phosphate, a co-substrate, in the active site at 2.3-A resolution. RNase PH has the typical alpha/beta fold, which forms a hexameric ring structure as a trimer of dimers. This ring structure resembles that of the polynucleotide phosphorylase core domain homotrimer, another phosphorolytic exoribonuclease. Four amino acid residues, Arg-86, Gly-124, Thr-125, and Arg-126, of RNase PH are involved in the phosphate-binding site. Mutational analyses of these residues showed their importance in the phosphorolysis reaction. A docking model with the tRNA acceptor stem suggests how RNase PH accommodates substrate RNAs.
7549887	Crystallization and preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies on Type III antifreeze protein.	Type III antifreeze protein, more specifically the recombinant QAE-Sephadex-binding isoform, has been crystallized in 50-55% saturated ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M sodium acetate, pH 4.0-4.5. The resultant crystals belong to the orthorhombic space group P212121 with a = 32.60 A, b = 39.00 A, and c = 46.57 A and diffract to at least 1.7 A. A set of 1.7-A native data has been collected, with completeness 93.4% and Rsym of 0.069. Initial screening for heavy-atom derivatives has yielded a Pt-bound derivative.
7540934	High resolution structures of HIV-1 RT from four RT-inhibitor complexes.	We have determined the structures of four complexes of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with non-nucleoside inhibitors, three fully refined at high resolution. The highest resolution structure is of the RT-nevirapine complex which has an R-factor of 0.186 and a root-mean-square bond length deviation of 0.015 A for all data to 2.2 A. The structures reveal a common mode of binding for these chemically diverse compounds. The common features of binding are largely hydrophobic interactions and arise from induced shape complementarity achieved by conformational rearrangement of the enzyme and conformational/configurational rearrangement of the compounds.
12805457	Crystallographic identification of a noncompetitive inhibitor binding site on the hepatitis C virus NS5B RNA polymerase enzyme.	The virus-encoded nonstructural protein 5B (NS5B) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and is absolutely required for replication of the virus. NS5B exhibits significant differences from cellular polymerases and therefore has become an attractive target for anti-HCV therapy. Using a high-throughput screen, we discovered a novel NS5B inhibitor that binds to the enzyme noncompetitively with respect to nucleotide substrates. Here we report the crystal structure of NS5B complexed with this small molecule inhibitor. Unexpectedly, the inhibitor is bound within a narrow cleft on the protein's surface in the "thumb" domain, about 30 A from the enzyme's catalytic center. The interaction between this inhibitor and NS5B occurs without dramatic changes to the structure of the protein, and sequence analysis suggests that the binding site is conserved across known HCV genotypes. Possible mechanisms of inhibition include perturbation of protein dynamics, interference with RNA binding, and disruption of enzyme oligomerization.
9894812	Structure, genomic localization and recombinant expression of the mouse 6-pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase gene.	The 6-pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase (PTPS) is the second enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway from GTP to tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). BH4 is an essential cofactor of NO synthases and aromatic amino acid hydroxylases, the latter being responsible for hepatic phenylalanine degradation and monoamine neurotransmitter biosynthesis. BH4 deficiency due to autosomal recessive mutations in the human gene for PTPS leads to a broad range of phenotypes ranging from mild hyperphenylalaninemia to high phenylalanine levels concomitant with neurotransmitter depletion. An animal model to study PTPS deficiency is thus desired to investigate the molecular basis of the disease and its variability. Here, we report on the isolation and recombinant expression of the mouse PTPS gene, Pts. It is located on chromosome 9C-D and contains six exons with an open reading frame of 144 codons. The derived protein monomer has a molecular mass of 16187 Da and shows 82% and 93% identity to its human and rat counterparts, respectively. The mouse PTPS was expressed in bacterial cells and purified to homogeneity. The kinetic properties of the recombinant protein, apparent Km of approximately 10 microM and k(cat) of 0.27 s(-1), were similar to the native mouse enzyme in liver and brain extracts, and to the corresponding human and rat PTPS.
7608966	NMR structure of a stable "OB-fold" sub-domain isolated from staphylococcal nuclease.	Similar folds often occur in proteins with dissimilar sequences. The OB-fold forms a part of the structures of at least seven non-homologous proteins that share either oligonucleotide or oligosaccharide binding functions. A 1-103 fragment corresponding to the OB-fold of the 149 amino acid residue staphylococcal nuclease gives NMR spectra characteristic of an unfolded protein, i.e. the wild-type nuclease sequence is insufficient to maintain a stable tertiary structure in the absence of the C-terminal one-third of this single-domain protein. By contrast, the 1-103 fragment of nuclease with the mutations Val66Leu and Gly88Val adopts a stable tertiary structure. The NMR solution structure of this latter fragment is a close variation of the OB-fold found in the X-ray structure of the parent protein. The Val66Leu and Gly88Val mutations appear to stabilize tertiary structure by consolidating the hydrophobic core of the nuclease OB-fold sub-domain. Taken together, these results suggest that recurrent structural motifs such as the OB-fold may in some cases represent vestiges of autonomous folding units that, during evolution, have become integrated into more complex cooperative folding domains.
14596591	Crystal structure of allo-Ile(A2)-insulin, an inactive chiral analogue: implications for the mechanism of receptor binding.	The crystal structure of an inactive chiral analogue of insulin containing nonstandard substitution allo-Ile(A2) is described at 2.0 A resolution. In native insulin, the invariant Ile(A2) side chain anchors the N-terminal alpha-helix of the A-chain to the hydrophobic core. The structure of the variant protein was determined by molecular replacement as a T(3)R(3) zinc hexamer. Whereas respective T- and R-state main-chain structures are similar to those of native insulin (main-chain root-mean-square deviations (RMSD) of 0.45 and 0.54 A, respectively), differences in core packing are observed near the variant side chain. The R-state core resembles that of the native R-state with a local inversion of A2 orientation (core side chain RMSD 0.75 A excluding A2); in the T-state, allo-Ile(A2) exhibits an altered conformation in association with the reorganization of the surrounding side chains (RMSD 0.98 A). Surprisingly, the core of the R-state is similar to that observed in solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies of an engineered T-like monomer containing the same chiral substitution (allo-Ile(A2)-DKP-insulin; Xu, B., Hua, Q. X., Nakagawa, S. H., Jia, W., Chu, Y. C., Katsoyannis, P. G., and Weiss, M. A. (2002) J. Mol. Biol. 316, 435-441). Simulation of NOESY spectra based on crystallographic protomers enables the analysis of similarities and differences in solution. The different responses of the T- and R-state cores to chiral perturbation illustrates both their intrinsic plasticity and constraints imposed by hexamer assembly. Although variant T- and R-protomers retain nativelike protein surfaces, the receptor-binding activity of allo-Ile(A2)-insulin is low (2% relative to native insulin). This seeming paradox suggests that insulin undergoes a change in conformation to expose Ile(A2) at the hormone-receptor interface.
15170321	DNA cleavage by EcoRV endonuclease: two metal ions in three metal ion binding sites.	Four crystal structures of EcoRV endonuclease mutants K92A and K38A provide new insight into the mechanism of DNA bending and the structural basis for metal-dependent phosphodiester bond cleavage. The removal of a key active site positive charge in the uncleaved K92A-DNA-M(2+) substrate complex results in binding of a sodium ion in the position of the amine nitrogen, suggesting a key role for a positive charge at this position in stabilizing the sharp DNA bend prior to cleavage. By contrast, two structures of K38A cocrystallized with DNA and Mn(2+) ions in different lattice environments reveal cleaved product complexes featuring a common, novel conformation of the scissile phosphate group as compared to all previous EcoRV structures. In these structures, the released 5'-phosphate and 3'-OH groups remain in close juxtaposition with each other and with two Mn(2+) ions that bridge the conserved active site carboxylates. The scissile phosphates are found midway between their positions in the prereactive substrate and postreactive product complexes of the wild-type enzyme. Mn(2+) ions occupy two of the three sites previously described in the prereactive complexes and are plausibly positioned to generate the nucleophilic hydroxide ion, to compensate for the incipient additional negative charge in the transition state, and to ionize a second water for protonation of the 3'-oxyanion. Reconciliation of these findings with earlier X-ray and fluorescence studies suggests a novel mechanism in which a single initially bound metal ion in a third distinct site undergoes a shift in position together with movement of the scissile phosphate deeper into the active site cleft. This reconfigures the local environment to permit binding of the second metal ion followed by movement toward the pentacovalent transition state. The new mechanism suggested here embodies key features of previously proposed two- and three-metal catalytic models, and offers a view of the stereochemical pathway that integrates much of the copious structural and functional data that are available from exhaustive studies in many laboratories.
9136873	Identification of a loop outside the active site cavity of the human immunodeficiency virus proteases which confers inhibitor specificity.	We have investigated the inhibitor specificity for the proteases of the human immunodeficiency viruses, types 1 and 2. Using a series of related inhibitors, the P1' side chain was confirmed to play a significant role in determining both the absolute and relative affinity for the enzymes. To further define the residues in the enzymes responsible for the difference in affinity, chimeric proteins were constructed in which domains of the respective proteases were exchanged at the genetic level. The results of these studies demonstrated that inhibitor affinity is conferred by a combination of the active site residues (32, 47, and 82) along with a loop comprised of residues 31 and 33-37, which lies outside of the active site cavity. These results are discussed in terms of existing structural data.
8599765	Identification of the primary metal ion-activation sites of the diphtheria tox repressor by X-ray crystallography and site-directed mutational analysis.	The diphtheria tox repressor, DtxR, is a 226 amino acid transition metal ion-activated regulatory protein that controls the expression of diphtheria toxin in toxigenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae. The previously solved three-dimensional DtxR structures have identified two potential metal ion binding sites which may play a role in the activation of DNA binding by the repressor. We have used both X-ray crystallographic and site-directed mutational analysis of DtxR(C102D)-Ni2+ complexes and DtxR to identify the metal ion-binding site which results in the activation of the repressor. We demonstrate that DtxR contains both a primary and an ancillary metal ion binding site. The primary site functions directly in the activation of DNA binding. In contrast, the ancillary site contributes weakly, if at all, to activation.
7883193	Overproduction, purification and structural characterization of the functional N-terminal DNA-binding domain of the fru repressor from Escherichia coli K-12.	A DNA fragment encoding the DNA-binding domain (amino acids 1-60) of the Escherichia coli fru transcriptional regulator was cloned into the pGEX-KT vector and expressed in frame with the fused gene encoding glutathione S-transferase. The fusion protein was purified to homogeneity by affinity chromatography on immobilized glutathione, and then cleaved with thrombin. After separation by a cation-exchange chromatography step, the DNA-binding domain exhibited proper folding, as shown by proton NMR analysis. Furthermore, it showed specific interaction with the operator region of the ace operon, as checked by gel retardation and DNA methylation-protection experiments.
16484367	The molecular architecture of the metalloprotease FtsH.	The ATP-dependent integral membrane protease FtsH is universally conserved in bacteria. Orthologs exist in chloroplasts and mitochondria, where in humans the loss of a close FtsH-homolog causes a form of spastic paraplegia. FtsH plays a crucial role in quality control by degrading unneeded or damaged membrane proteins, but it also targets soluble signaling factors like sigma(32) and lambda-CII. We report here the crystal structure of a soluble FtsH construct that is functional in caseinolytic and ATPase assays. The molecular architecture of this hexameric molecule consists of two rings where the protease domains possess an all-helical fold and form a flat hexagon that is covered by a toroid built by the AAA domains. The active site of the protease classifies FtsH as an Asp-zincin, contrary to a previous report. The different symmetries of protease and AAA rings suggest a possible translocation mechanism of the target polypeptide chain into the interior of the molecule where the proteolytic sites are located.
2006420	The three-dimensional structure of canine parvovirus and its functional implications.	The three-dimensional atomic structure of a single-stranded DNA virus has been determined. Infectious virions of canine parvovirus contain 60 protein subunits that are predominantly VP-2. The central structural motif of VP-2 has the same topology (an eight-stranded antiparallel beta barrel) as has been found in many other icosahedral viruses but represents only about one-third of the capsid protein. There is a 22 angstrom (A) long protrusion on the threefold axes, a 15 A deep canyon circulating about each of the five cylindrical structures at the fivefold axes, and a 15 A deep depression at the twofold axes. By analogy with rhinoviruses, the canyon may be the site of receptor attachment. Residues related to the antigenic properties of the virus are found on the threefold protrusions. Some of the amino termini of VP-2 run to the exterior in full but not empty virions, which is consistent with the observation that some VP-2 polypeptides in full particles can be cleaved by trypsin. Eleven nucleotides are seen in each of 60 symmetry-related pockets on the interior surface of the capsid and together account for 13 percent of the genome.
9698564	A pH-dependent stabilization of an active site loop observed from low and high pH crystal structures of mutant monomeric glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase at 1.8 to 1.9 A.	A mutation in the dimer interface of Escherichia coli glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GarTfase) disrupts the observed pH-dependent association of the wild-type enzyme, but has no observable effect on the enzyme activity. Here, we assess whether a pH effect on the enzyme's conformation is sufficient by itself to explain the pH-dependence of the GarTfase reaction. A pH-dependent conformational change is observed between two high-resolution crystal structures of the Glu70Ala mutant GarTfase at pH 3.5 (1.8 A) and 7.5 (1.9 A). Residues 110 to 131 in GarTfase undergo a transformation from a disordered loop at pH 3.5, where the enzyme is inactive, to an ordered loop-helix structure at pH 7.5, where the enzyme is active. The ordering of this flexible loop-helix has a direct effect on catalytic residues in the active site, binding of the folate cofactor and shielding of the active site from solvent. A main-chain carbonyl oxygen atom from Tyr115 in the ordered loop forms a hydrogen bond with His108, and thereby provides electronic and structural stabilization of this key active site residue. Kinetic data indicate that the pKa of His108 is in fact raised to 9. 2. The loop movement can be correlated with elevation of the His pKa, but with further stabilization, probably from Asp144, after the binding of folate cofactor. Leu118, also in the loop, becomes positioned near the p-amino benzoic acid binding site, providing additional hydrophobic interactions with the cofactor 10-formyl tetrahydrofolate. Thus, the pH-dependence of the enzyme activity appears to arise from local active site rearrangements and not from differences due to monomer-dimer association.
12732641	Structure and dynamics of the C-domain of human cardiac troponin C in complex with the inhibitory region of human cardiac troponin I.	Cardiac troponin C is the Ca2+-dependent switch for heart muscle contraction. Troponin C is associated with various other proteins including troponin I and troponin T. The interaction between the subunits within the troponin complex is of critical importance in understanding contractility. Following a Ca2+ signal to begin contraction, the inhibitory region of troponin I comprising residues Thr128-Arg147 relocates from its binding surface on actin to troponin C, triggering movement of troponin-tropomyosin within the thin filament and thereby freeing actin-binding site(s) for interactions with the myosin ATPase of the thick filament to generate the power stroke. The structure of calcium-saturated cardiac troponin C (C-domain) in complex with the inhibitory region of troponin I was determined using multinuclear and multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The structure of this complex reveals that the inhibitory region adopts a helical conformation spanning residues Leu134-Lys139, with a novel orientation between the E- and H-helices of troponin C, which is largely stabilized by electrostatic interactions. By using isotope labeling, we have studied the dynamics of the protein and peptide in the binary complex. The structure of this inhibited complex provides a framework for understanding into interactions within the troponin complex upon heart contraction.
15235589	Nucleotide insertion opposite a cis-syn thymine dimer by a replicative DNA polymerase from bacteriophage T7.	Ultraviolet-induced DNA damage poses a lethal block to replication. To understand the structural basis for this, we determined crystal structures of a replicative DNA polymerase from bacteriophage T7 in complex with nucleotide substrates and a DNA template containing a cis-syn cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD). When the 3' thymine is the templating base, the CPD is rotated out of the polymerase active site and the fingers subdomain adopts an open orientation. When the 5' thymine is the templating base, the CPD lies within the polymerase active site where it base-pairs with the incoming nucleotide and the 3' base of the primer, while the fingers are in a closed conformation. These structures reveal the basis for the strong block of DNA replication that is caused by this photolesion.
15213399	Expression, purification and crystallization of a functional core of the voltage-dependent calcium channel beta subunit.	Two versions of the functional core of the rabbit voltage-dependent calcium channel beta2a subunit were expressed in Escherichia coli. These proteins were purified to homogeneity and screened for crystallization. Crystallization conditions were refined using the hanging-drop vapour-diffusion method and two crystal forms were pursued. Crystal form I is represented by thick rods with tetragonal symmetry, unit-cell parameters a = b = 75, c = 165 A and a diffraction limit of 3.4 A which were obtained using ammonium sulfate as a precipitant. Crystal form II gives rise to plates with orthorhombic symmetry, unit-cell parameters a = 35, b = 75, c = 165 A and a diffraction limit of 2.3 A which were grown using polyethylene glycol 20K as a precipitant.
11052791	Identification of novel inhibitors of urokinase via NMR-based screening.	Using an NMR-based screen, a novel class of urokinase inhibitors were identified that contain a 2-aminobenzimidazole moiety. The inhibitory potency of this family of inhibitors is similar to that of inhibitors containing a guanidine or amidine group. However, unlike previously described guanidino- or amidino-based inhibitors which have pK(a) values greater than 9.0, urokinase inhibitors containing a 2-aminobenzimidazole have pK(a) values of 7.5. Thus, 2-aminobenzimidazoles may have improved pharmacokinetic properties which could increase the bioavailability of inhibitors which contain this moiety. A crystal structure of one of the lead inhibitors, 2-amino-5-hydroxybenzimidazole, complexed with urokinase reveals the electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions that stabilize complex formation and suggests nearby subsites that may be accessed to increase the potency of this new series of urokinase inhibitors.
15779910	Effect of pH on the active site of an Arg121Cys mutant of the metallo-beta-lactamase from Bacillus cereus: implications for the enzyme mechanism.	The zinc-dependent metallo-beta-lactamases are a group of bacterial enzymes that pose a threat to the future efficacy of present-day antibiotics. Their mechanism is poorly understood, and there are no clinically useful inhibitors. While most members of the group contain two tightly bound zinc ions in their active sites, the Bacillus cereus enzyme has a much lower affinity for its second zinc (Zn2), thought to be due to the presence of Arg121 immediately beneath the floor of the active site (cf. Cys/Ser/His121 in the bizinc enzymes). Crystal structures of the Arg121Cys mutant of the B. cereus 569/H/9 enzyme were solved at pH 7.0, 5.0, and 4.5, each in the presence of either 20 microM or 20 mM Zn(2+) to generate the mono- and bizinc forms, respectively. Surprisingly, the structure of the active site was unaffected by the mutation; a network of ordered water molecules replaced the interactions made by the arginine side chain, and the occupancy of Zn2 appeared minimally changed. As the pH was lowered, Zn2 moved away from one of its ligands, Asp120, but was "tracked" by two others, Cys221 and His263. Furthermore, the hydroxide ion (and proposed nucleophile for beta-lactam hydrolysis) was bound to Zn1 at pH 5 and above but absent at pH 4.5. This provides experimental evidence for an earlier proposed mechanism in which protonation of Asp120 and the Zn1-bound hydroxide are the two events that lead to the loss of activity at low pH.
8381964	Pathway of proton transfer in bacterial reaction centers: second-site mutation Asn-M44-->Asp restores electron and proton transfer in reaction centers from the photosynthetically deficient Asp-L213-->Asn mutant of Rhodobacter sphaeroides.	Site-directed mutagenesis of the photosynthetic reaction center (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides has shown Asp-213 of the L subunit (Asp-L213) to be important for photosynthetic viability. Replacement of Asp-L213 with Asn resulted in a photosynthetically deficient mutant, due to the 10(4)-fold slower rate for the proton-coupled electron transfer reaction QA-QB- + 2H+-->QAQBH2 (k(2)AB). The detrimental effect of Asn-L213 is surprising since RCs from Rhodopseudomonas viridis, Rhodospirillum rubrum, and Chloroflexus aurantiacus have Asn at the homologous position. However, RCs from these bacteria have an Asp located near QB (the secondary quinone acceptor) at the position homologous to Asn-M44 in Rb. sphaeroides which might function in place of Asp-L213. To test this conjecture a "viridis-like" structure was introduced into Rb. sphaeroides by replacing Asp-L213 with Asn and Asn-M44 with Asp. The RCs from this double mutant displayed near-native rates for the electron transfer reaction k(2)AB and restored photosynthetic competence. The rates for the first electron transfer reaction QA-QB-->QAQB- (k(1)AB) and charge recombination D+QAQB--->DQAQB (kBD) were also restored to near-native values. These results indicate that Asp at either the L213 or the M44 site near QB can provide a pathway for rapid proton transfer and explain why Asp-L213 need not be conserved in different photosynthetic bacteria. To test further the effect of Asp at M44 on electron and proton transfer to QB a mutant containing Asp at both L213 and M44 was constructed. The RCs from this mutant (Asn-M44-->Asp) exhibited faster proton-coupled electron transfer to QB-. The increased rate of proton-coupled electron transfer (k(2)AB) in the presence of negatively charged Asp residues near QB suggests the role of an Asp near QB as (i) a proton donor group in the proton transfer chain and/or (ii) a negatively charged residue stabilizing proton transfer to reduced QB.
9614112	Crystal structures of reaction intermediates of L-2-haloacid dehalogenase and implications for the reaction mechanism.	Crystal structures of L-2-haloacid dehalogenase from Pseudomonas sp. YL complexed with monochloroacetate, L-2-chlorobutyrate, L-2-chloro-3-methylbutyrate, or L-2-chloro-4-methylvalerate were determined at 1.83-, 2.0-, 2.2-, and 2.2-A resolutions, respectively, using the complex crystals prepared with the S175A mutant, which are isomorphous with those of the wild-type enzyme. These structures exhibit unique structural features that correspond to those of the reaction intermediates. In each case, the nucleophile Asp-10 is esterified with the dechlorinated moiety of the substrate. The substrate moieties in all but the monochloroacetate intermediate have a D-configuration at the C2 atom. The overall polypeptide fold of each of the intermediates is similar to that of the wild-type enzyme. However, it is clear that the Asp-10-Ser-20 region moves to the active site in all of the intermediates, and the Tyr-91-Asp-102 and Leu-117-Arg-135 regions make conformational changes in all but the monochloroacetate intermediates. Ser-118 is located near the carboxyl group of the substrate moiety; this residue probably serves as a binding residue for the substrate carboxyl group. The hydrophobic pocket, which is primarily composed of the Tyr-12, Gln-42, Leu-45, Phe-60, Lys-151, Asn-177, and Trp-179 side chains, exists around the alkyl group of the substrate moiety. This pocket may play an important role in stabilizing the alkyl group of the substrate moiety through hydrophobic interactions, and may also play a role in determining the stereospecificity of the enzyme. Moreover, a water molecule, which is absent in the substrate-free enzyme, is present in the vicinities of the carboxyl carbon of Asp-10 and the side chains of Asp-180, Asn-177, and Ala-175 in each intermediate. This water molecule may hydrolyze the ester intermediate and its substrate. These findings crystallographically demonstrate that the enzyme reaction proceeds through the formation of an ester intermediate with the enzyme's nucleophile Asp-10.
9741848	Crystal structures of HLA-A*0201 complexed with antigenic peptides with either the amino- or carboxyl-terminal group substituted by a methyl group.	The crystal structures of class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules complexed with antigenic peptides revealed a network of hydrogen bonds between the charged amino- and carboxyl-termini of the peptides and conserved MHC residues at both ends of the peptide binding site. These interactions were shown to contribute substantially to the stability of class I MHC/peptide complexes by thermal denaturation studies using synthetic peptides in which either the amino- or carboxyl-terminal group is substituted by a methyl group. Here we report crystal structures of HLA-A*0201 complexed with these terminally modified synthetic peptides showing that they adopt the same bound conformation as antigenic peptides. A number of variations in peptide conformation were observed for the terminally modified peptides, including in one case, a large conformational difference in four central peptide residues that is apparently caused by the lattice contact. This is reminiscent of the way binding a T-cell receptor changed the conformation of central residues of an MHC-bound peptide. The structures determined identify which conserved hydrogen bonds are eliminated in terminally substituted peptides and suggest an increased energetic importance of the interactions at the peptide termini for MHC-peptide stability.
15115397	Roles of conformational and positional adaptability in structure-based design of TMC125-R165335 (etravirine) and related non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors that are highly potent and effective against wild-type and drug-resistant HIV-1 variants.	Anti-AIDS drug candidate and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) TMC125-R165335 (etravirine) caused an initial drop in viral load similar to that observed with a five-drug combination in naove patients and retains potency in patients infected with NNRTI-resistant HIV-1 variants. TMC125-R165335 and related anti-AIDS drug candidates can bind the enzyme RT in multiple conformations and thereby escape the effects of drug-resistance mutations. Structural studies showed that this inhibitor and other diarylpyrimidine (DAPY) analogues can adapt to changes in the NNRTI-binding pocket in several ways: (1). DAPY analogues can bind in at least two conformationally distinct modes; (2). within a given binding mode, torsional flexibility ("wiggling") of DAPY analogues permits access to numerous conformational variants; and (3). the compact design of the DAPY analogues permits significant repositioning and reorientation (translation and rotation) within the pocket ("jiggling"). Such adaptations appear to be critical for potency against wild-type and a wide range of drug-resistant mutant HIV-1 RTs. Exploitation of favorable components of inhibitor conformational flexibility (such as torsional flexibility about strategically located chemical bonds) can be a powerful drug design concept, especially for designing drugs that will be effective against rapidly mutating targets.
12646375	Multiple methionine substitutions are tolerated in T4 lysozyme and have coupled effects on folding and stability.	In order to further explore the tolerance of proteins to amino acid substitutions within the interior, a series of core residues was replaced by methionine within the C-terminal domain of T4 lysozyme. By replacing leucine, isoleucine, valine and phenylalanine residues a total of 10 methionines could be introduced, which corresponds to a third of the residues that are buried in this domain. As more methionines are incorporated the protein gradually loses stability. This is attributed in part to a reduction in hydrophobic stabilization, in part to the increased entropic cost of localizing the long, flexible methionine sidechains, and in part to steric clashes. The changes in structure of the mutants relative to the wildtype protein are modest but tend to increase in an additive fashion as more methionines are included. In the most extreme case, namely the 10-methionine mutant, much of the C-terminal domain remains quite similar to wildtype (root-mean-square backbone shifts of 0.56 A), while the F and G helices undergo rotations of approximately 20 degrees and center-of-mass shifts of approximately 1.4 A. For up to six methionine substitutions the changes in stability are additive. Beyond this point, however, the multiple mutants are somewhat more stable than suggested from the sum of their constituents, especially for those including the replacement Val111-->Met. This is interpreted in terms of the larger structural changes associated with this substitution. The substituted sidechains in the mutant structures have somewhat higher crystallographic thermal factors than their counterparts in WT*. Nevertheless, the interiors of the mutant proteins retain a well-defined structure with little suggestion of molten-globule characteristics. Lysozymes in which selenomethionine has been incorporated rather than methionine tend to have increased stability. At the same time they also fold faster. This provides further evidence that, at the rate-limiting step in folding, the structure of the C-terminal domain of T4 lysozyme is similar to that of the fully folded protein.
7500361	The refined X-ray structure of muconate lactonizing enzyme from Pseudomonas putida PRS2000 at 1.85 A resolution.	We report here the refined X-ray crystal structure of muconate lactonizing enzyme (MLE) from Pseudomonas putida PRS2000 at a resolution of 1.85 A with an R-factor of 16.8%. An enzyme from the beta-ketoadipate pathway, MLE catalyses the conversion of cis,cis-muconate to muconolactone. It is a homo-octamer, one monomer consisting of 373 amino acid residues. MLE has two large domains and a C-terminal subdomain: an alpha + beta domain, an alpha beta-barrel domain and a C-terminal meandering subdomain. The alpha beta-barrel domain is highly irregular. Its structure is (beta/alpha)7 beta, with the structural role of the last alpha-helix being replaced by both the C-terminal subdomain and part of the N-terminal domain. The fifth, seventh and eighth barrel strands are unusual because they have left-handed twist about their axes. The strand crossing angles also vary enormously, from +9 degrees to -69 degrees; the first and last strands, which close the barrel, cross at an angle of -69 degrees, making extensive strand-strand hydrogen bonding impossible. The first barrel strand is also unusual because it starts in the N-terminal domain and forms hydrogen bonds to the C-terminal subdomain beta-sheet as well as to its neighbouring strands in the barrel. It thus cements the whole protein together. As in other alpha beta-barrel proteins, the active site of MLE, present in each subunit is at the C-terminal ends of the barrel beta-strands. The active site cleft contains an essential manganese ion, is lined with charged and other polar residues, and contains many of the crystallographic water molecules. The manganese ion is octahedrally co-ordinated to three side-chain carboxylate groups and three water molecules, and is at the centre of a radiating web of ionic and hydrogen-bonding interactions. Additionally, two water molecules are buried in the centre of the barrel and two hydrophilic side-chains (Lys167 and Arg196) make both hydrophobic and hydrophilic packing interactions with much of the barrel interior. The barrel interior is thus also unusual because it is so hydrophilic; the dominating force appears to be the need to solvate the metal ion effectively. This might account for the irregularity of the barrel. The catalytic mechanism has been investigated by docking both substrate and product in the active site with the C-COO- of muconolactone superimposed on the corresponding atoms of cis,cis-muconate. In agreement with earlier kinetic and spectroscopic results, the manganese ion does not interact directly with substrate or product.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
11086992	Mechanisms for activation and antagonism of an AMPA-sensitive glutamate receptor: crystal structures of the GluR2 ligand binding core.	Crystal structures of the GluR2 ligand binding core (S1S2) have been determined in the apo state and in the presence of the antagonist DNQX, the partial agonist kainate, and the full agonists AMPA and glutamate. The domains of the S1S2 ligand binding core are expanded in the apo state and contract upon ligand binding with the extent of domain separation decreasing in the order of apo > DNQX > kainate > glutamate approximately equal to AMPA. These results suggest that agonist-induced domain closure gates the transmembrane channel and the extent of receptor activation depends upon the degree of domain closure. AMPA and glutamate also promote a 180 degrees flip of a trans peptide bond in the ligand binding site. The crystal packing of the ligand binding cores suggests modes for subunit-subunit contact in the intact receptor and mechanisms by which allosteric effectors modulate receptor activity.
8703213	A protein phosphorylation switch at the conserved allosteric site in GP.	A phosphorylation-initiated mechanism of local protein refolding activates yeast glycogen phosphorylase (GP). Refolding of the phosphorylated amino-terminus was shown to create a hydrophobic cluster that wedges into the subunit interface of the enzyme to trigger activation. The phosphorylated threonine is buried in the allosteric site. The mechanism implicates glucose 6-phosphate, the allosteric inhibitor, in facilitating dephosphorylation by dislodging the buried covalent phosphate through binding competition. Thus, protein phosphorylation-dephosphorylation may also be controlled through regulation of the accessibility of the phosphorylation site to kinases and phosphatases. In mammalian glycogen phosphorylase, phosphorylation occurs at a distinct locus. The corresponding allosteric site binds a ligand activator, adenosine monophosphate, which triggers activation by a mechanism analogous to that of phosphorylation in the yeast enzyme.
2558377	Structural analysis of antiviral agents that interact with the capsid of human rhinoviruses.	X-Ray diffraction data have been obtained for nine related antiviral agents ("WIN compounds") while bound to human rhinovirus 14 (HRV14). These compounds can inhibit both viral attachment to host cells and uncoating. To calculate interpretable electron density maps it was necessary to account for (1) the low (approximately 60%) occupancies of these compounds in the crystal, (2) the large (up to 7.9 A) conformational changes induced at the attachment site, and (3) the incomplete diffraction data. Application of a density difference map technique, which exploits the 20-fold noncrystallographic redundancy in HRV14, resulted in clear images of the HRV14:WIN complexes. A real-space refinement procedure was used to fit atomic models to these maps. The binding site of WIN compounds in HRV14 is a hydrophobic pocket composed mainly from residues that form the beta-barrel of VP1. Among rhinoviruses, the residues associated with the binding pocket are far more conserved than external residues and are mostly contained within regular secondary structural elements. Molecular dynamics simulations of three HRV14:WIN complexes suggest that portions of the WIN compounds and viral protein near the entrance of the binding pocket are more flexible than portions deeper within the beta-barrel.
3586019	Structure of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme refined at 1.7 A resolution.	The structure of the lysozyme from bacteriophage T4 has been refined at 1.7 A resolution to a crystallographic residual of 19.3%. The final model has bond lengths and bond angles that differ from "ideal" values by 0.019 A and 2.7 degrees, respectively. The crystals are grown from electron-dense phosphate solutions and the use of an appropriate solvent continuum substantially improved the agreement between the observed and calculated structure factors at low resolution. Apart from changes in the conformations of some side-chains, the refinement confirms the structure of the molecule as initially derived from a 2.4 A resolution electron density map. There are 118 well-ordered solvent molecules that are associated with the T4 lysozyme molecule in the crystal. Four of these are more-or-less buried. There is a clustering of water molecules within the active site cleft but, other than this, the solvent molecules are dispersed around the surface of the molecule and do not aggregate into ice-like structures or pentagonal or hexagonal clusters. The apparent motion of T4 lysozyme in the crystal can be interpreted in terms of significant interdomain motion corresponding to an opening and closing of the active site cleft. For the amino-terminal domain the motion can be described equally well (correlation coefficients approx. 0.87) as quasi-rigid-body motion either about a point or about an axis of rotation. The motion in the crystals of the carboxy-terminal domain is best described as rotation about an axis (correlation coefficient 0.80) although in this case the apparent motion seems to be influenced in part by crystal contacts and may be of questionable relevance to dynamics in solution.
1512262	A third quaternary structure of human hemoglobin A at 1.7-A resolution.	Previous crystallographic studies have shown that human hemoglobin A can adopt two stable quaternary structures, one for deoxyhemoglobin (the T-state) and one for liganded hemoglobin (the R-state). In this paper we report our finding of a second quaternary structure (the R2-state) for liganded hemoglobin A. The magnitudes of the spatial differences between the R- and R2-states are as large as those between the R- and T-states. Of particular interest are the structural changes that occur as a result of R-T and R-R2 transitions at the so-called "switch" region of the critical alpha 1 beta 2 interface. In the R-state, His-97 beta 2 is positioned between Thr-38 alpha 1 and Thr-41 alpha 1, whereas in transition to the T-state His 97 beta 2 must "jump" a turn in the alpha 1 C helix to form nonpolar contacts with Thr-41 alpha 1 and Pro-44 alpha 1. This facet of the R-T transition presents a major steric barrier to the quaternary structure change. In the R2-state, His-97 beta 2 simply rotates away from threonines 38 alpha 1 and 41 alpha 1, breaking contact with these residues and allowing water access to the center of the alpha 1 beta 2 interface. With the switch region in an open position in the R2-state, His-97 beta 2 should be able to move by Thr-41 alpha 1 and make the transition to the T-state with a steric barrier that is less than that for the R-T transition. Thus the R2-state may function as a stable intermediate along a R-R2-T pathway. The T-, R-, and R2-states must coexist in solution. That is, the fact that these states can be crystallized implies that they are all energetically accessible structures. What remains to be determined are the T-to-R, T-to-R2, and R-to-R2 equilibrium constants for hemoglobin under various solution conditions and ligation states. Although this may prove to be difficult, we discuss previously published results which indicate that low concentrations of inorganic anions or low pH may favor the R2-state and at least one alpha 1 beta 2 interface mutation stabilizes a quaternary structure that is very similar to the R2-state.
12832805	Effect of mutations in the T1.5 loop of pectate lyase A from Erwinia chrysanthemi EC16.	Pectate lyase A (PelA) is a pectate-degrading enzyme secreted by plant pathogens. PelA from Erwinia chrysanthemi has 61% amino-acid identity and a conserved structural similarity to pectate lyase E (PelE). Although similar in structure and sequence, the enzymatic characteristics of PelA differ from those for PelE. A structural alignment of PelA and PelE reveals differences in the T1.5 loop. The sequence of the T1.5 loop in PelA was mutated to the homologous sequence in PelE. The crystal structure of the PelA T1.5 mutant has been solved to 1.6 and 2.9 A resolution. The enzymatic and structural properties of the T1.5 mutant are discussed.
8590022	Role of C-terminal B-chain residues in insulin assembly: the structure of hexameric LysB28ProB29-human insulin.	BACKGROUND: LysB28ProB29-human insulin (Humalog), a fully potent insulin analog in which the prolyl, lysyl sequence at the C-terminal end of the B-chain is inverted, exhibits a decreased association of monomers to dimers leading to rapid in vivo absorption. This provides important benefits for the insulin-requiring diabetic. In spite of its monomeric nature, LysB28ProB29-human insulin can exist as a discrete hexameric structure in the presence of both zinc and phenol. Studies of the crystal structure of LysB28ProB29-human insulin in a hexameric complex were initiated to gain a molecular understanding of the effect of the sequence inversion on the analog's self-association properties and, consequently, its in vivo efficacy. RESULTS: Under the conditions reported, LysB28ProB29-human insulin crystallized as a T3Rf3 hexamer that is isomorphous with the uncomplexed T3Rf3 native human insulin hexamer previously known as '4Zn insulin'. The three-dimensional structure of the T3Rf3 hexamer was determined by X-ray crystallographic methods to a resolution of 2.3 A. The prolyl, lysyl sequence inversion leads to local conformational changes at the C termini of the B-chains which eliminate two critical hydrophobic interactions and weaken two terminal beta-sheet hydrogen bonds that stabilize the dimer. CONCLUSIONS: The loss of these native dimer interactions weakens the hexameric LysB28ProB29-human insulin complex formed in the presence of phenolic ligands. Thus, it is hypothesized that the diffusion of the phenolic ligands from the site of injection results in the dissociation of hexamers directly to monomers, thereby maintaining the rapid time-action of the monomeric analog in spite of the hexameric conformation in therapeutic formulations.
11428899	Crystal structure of pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase: "flipped" binding geometries for steroid substrates in different redox states of the enzyme.	Pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase (PETN reductase) degrades high explosive molecules including nitrate esters, nitroaromatics and cyclic triazine compounds. The enzyme also binds a variety of cyclic enones, including steroids; some steroids act as substrates whilst others are inhibitors. Understanding the basis of reactivity with cyclic enones requires structural information for the enzyme and key complexes formed with steroid substrates and inhibitors. The crystal structure of oxidised and reduced PETN reductase at 1.5 A resolution establishes a close structural similarity to the beta/alpha-barrel flavoenzyme, old yellow enzyme. In complexes of oxidised PETN reductase with progesterone (an inhibitor), 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione and prednisone (both substrates) the steroids are stacked over the si-face of the flavin in an orientation different from that reported for old yellow enzyme. The specifically reducible 1,2 unsaturated bonds in 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione and prednisone are not optimally aligned with the flavin N5 in oxidised enzyme complexes. These structures suggest either relative "flipping" or shifting of the steroid with respect to the flavin when bound in different redox forms of the enzyme. Deuterium transfer from nicotinamide coenzyme to 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione via the enzyme bound FMN indicates 1alpha addition at the steroid C2 atom. These studies rule out lateral motion of the steroid and indicate that the steroid orientation is "flipped" in different redox states of the enzyme.
8951384	Mapping the functional surface of insulin by design: structure and function of a novel A-chain analogue.	Functional surfaces of a protein are often mapped by combination of X-ray crystallography and mutagenesis. Such studies of insulin have yielded paradoxical results, suggesting that the native state is inactive and reorganizes on receptor binding. Of particular interest is the N-terminal alpha-helix of the A-chain. Does this segment function as an alpha-helix or reorganize as recently proposed in a prohormone-convertase complex? To correlate structure and function, we describe a mapping strategy based on protein design. The solution structure of an engineered monomer ([AspB10, LysB28, ProB29]-human insulin) is determined at neutral pH as a template for synthesis of a novel A-chain analogue. Designed by analogy to a protein-folding intermediate, the analogue lacks the A6-A11 disulphide bridge; the cysteine residues are replaced by serine. Its solution structure is remarkable for segmental unfolding of the N-terminal A-chain alpha-helix (A1 to A8) in an otherwise native subdomain. The structure demonstrates that the overall orientation of the A and B chains is consistent with reorganization of the A-chain's N-terminal segment. Nevertheless, the analogue's low biological activity suggests that this segment, a site of clinical mutation causing diabetes mellitus, functions as a preformed recognition alpha-helix.
9010773	The structure, stability, and folding process of amyloidogenic mutant human lysozyme.	The physicochemical properties of an amyloidogenic mutant human lysozyme (Ile56Thr) were examined in order to elucidate the mechanism of amyloid formation. The crystal structure of the mutant protein was the same as the wild-type structure, except that the hydroxyl group of the introduced Thr56 formed a hydrogen bond with a water molecule in the interior of the protein. The other physicochemical properties of the mutant protein in the native state were not different from those of the wild-type protein. However, the equilibrium and kinetic stabilities of the mutant protein were remarkably decreased due to the introduction of a polar residue (Thr) in the interior of the molecule. It can be concluded that the amyloid formation of the mutant human lysozyme is due to a tendency to favor (partly or/and completely) denatured structures.
14559966	Crystal structure of the tyrosine kinase domain of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor c-Met and its complex with the microbial alkaloid K-252a.	The protooncogene c-met codes for the hepatocyte growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase. Binding of its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor, stimulates receptor autophosphorylation, which leads to pleiotropic downstream signaling events in epithelial cells, including cell growth, motility, and invasion. These events are mediated by interaction of cytoplasmic effectors, generally through Src homology 2 (SH2) domains, with two phosphotyrosine-containing sequence motifs in the unique C-terminal tail of c-Met (supersite). There is a strong link between aberrant c-Met activity and oncogenesis, which makes this kinase an important cancer drug target. The furanosylated indolocarbazole K-252a belongs to a family of microbial alkaloids that also includes staurosporine. It was recently shown to be a potent inhibitor of c-Met. Here we report the crystal structures of an unphosphorylated c-Met kinase domain harboring a human cancer mutation and its complex with K-252a at 1.8-A resolution. The structure follows the well established architecture of protein kinases. It adopts a unique, inhibitory conformation of the activation loop, a catalytically noncompetent orientation of helix alphaC, and reveals the complete C-terminal docking site. The first SH2-binding motif (1349YVHV) adopts an extended conformation, whereas the second motif (1356YVNV), a binding site for Grb2-SH2, folds as a type II Beta-turn. The intermediate portion of the supersite (1353NATY) assumes a type I Beta-turn conformation as in an Shc-phosphotyrosine binding domain peptide complex. K-252a is bound in the adenosine pocket with an analogous binding mode to those observed in previously reported structures of protein kinases in complex with staurosporine.
14523232	Mechanism and energetics of green fluorescent protein chromophore synthesis revealed by trapped intermediate structures.	Green fluorescent protein has revolutionized cell labeling and molecular tagging, yet the driving force and mechanism for its spontaneous fluorophore synthesis are not established. Here we discover mutations that substantially slow the rate but not the yield of this posttranslational modification, determine structures of the trapped precyclization intermediate and oxidized postcyclization states, and identify unanticipated features critical to chromophore maturation. The protein architecture contains a dramatic approximately 80 degrees bend in the central helix, which focuses distortions at G67 to promote ring formation from amino acids S65, Y66, and G67. Significantly, these distortions eliminate potential helical hydrogen bonds that would otherwise have to be broken at an energetic cost during peptide cyclization and force the G67 nitrogen and S65 carbonyl oxygen atoms within van der Waals contact in preparation for covalent bond formation. Further, we determine that under aerobic, but not anaerobic, conditions the Gly-Gly-Gly chromophore sequence cyclizes and incorporates an oxygen atom. These results lead directly to a conjugation-trapping mechanism, in which a thermodynamically unfavorable cyclization reaction is coupled to an electronic conjugation trapping step, to drive chromophore maturation. Moreover, we propose primarily electrostatic roles for the R96 and E222 side chains in chromophore formation and suggest that the T62 carbonyl oxygen is the base that initiates the dehydration reaction. Our molecular mechanism provides the basis for understanding and eventually controlling chromophore creation.
2276482	Combined familial hyperlipidaemia in association with apolipoprotein E3 phenotype.	null
9609690	A mutational analysis of binding interactions in an antigen-antibody protein-protein complex.	Alanine scanning mutagenesis, double mutant cycles, and X-ray crystallography were used to characterize the interface between the anti-hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) antibody D1.3 and HEL. Twelve out of the 13 nonglycine contact residues on HEL, as determined by the high-resolution crystal structure of the D1.3-HEL complex, were individually truncated to alanine. Only four positions showed a DeltaDeltaG (DeltaGmutant - DeltaGwild-type) of greater than 1.0 kcal/mol, with HEL residue Gln121 proving the most critical for binding (DeltaDeltaG = 2.9 kcal/mol). These residues form a contiguous patch at the periphery of the epitope recognized by D1.3. To understand how potentially disruptive mutations in the antigen are accommodated in the D1.3-HEL interface, we determined the crystal structure to 1.5 A resolution of the complex between D1.3 and HEL mutant Asp18 --> Ala. This mutation results in a DeltaDeltaG of only 0.3 kcal/mol, despite the loss of a hydrogen bond and seven van der Waals contacts to the Asp18 side chain. The crystal structure reveals that three additional water molecules are stably incorporated in the antigen-antibody interface at the site of the mutation. These waters help fill the cavity created by the mutation and form part of a rearranged solvent network linking the two proteins. To further dissect the energetics of specific interactions in the D1.3-HEL interface, double mutant cycles were carried out to measure the coupling of 14 amino acid pairs, 10 of which are in direct contact in the crystal structure. The highest coupling energies, 2.7 and 2.0 kcal/mol, were measured between HEL residue Gln121 and D1.3 residues VLTrp92 and VLTyr32, respectively. The interaction between Gln121 and VLTrp92 consists of three van der Waals contacts, while the interaction of Gln121 with VLTyr32 is mediated by a hydrogen bond. Surprisingly, however, most cycles between interface residues in direct contact in the crystal structure showed no significant coupling. In particular, a number of hydrogen-bonded residue pairs were found to make no net contribution to complex stabilization. We attribute these results to accessibility of the mutation sites to water, such that the mutated residues exchange their interaction with each other to interact with water. This implies that the strength of the protein-protein hydrogen bonds in these particular cases is comparable to that of the protein-water hydrogen bonds they replace. Thus, the simple fact that two residues are in direct contact in a protein-protein interface cannot be taken as evidence that there necessarily exists a productive interaction between them. Rather, the majority of such contacts may be energetically neutral, as in the D1.3-HEL complex.
9649316	Contribution of hydrogen bonds to the conformational stability of human lysozyme: calorimetry and X-ray analysis of six tyrosine --> phenylalanine mutants.	The contribution of hydrogen bonds to the conformational stability of human lysozyme was investigated by the combination of calorimetric and X-ray analyses of six Tyr --> Phe mutants. Unfolding Delta G and unfolding Delta H values of the Tyr --> Phe mutant proteins were changed by from +0.3 to -4.0 kJ/mol and from 0 to -16 kJ/mol, respectively, compared to those of the wild-type protein. The net contribution of a hydrogen bond at a specific site to stability (Delta Gwild/HB), considering factors affected by substitutions, was evaluated on the basis of X-ray structures of the mutant proteins. In the present study, one of six mutant proteins was suitable for evaluating the strength of the hydrogen bond. Delta Gwild/HB for the intramolecular hydrogen bond at Tyr124 was evaluated to be 7.5 kJ/mol. Results of the analysis of other mutants also suggest that hydrogen bonds of the hydroxyl group of Tyr, including the hydrogen bond with a water molecule, contribute to the stabilization of the human lysozyme.
11042604	Evaluating hydrogen-bond donor strength.	A parameter that measures hydrogen-bond donor (HBD) strength of solutes is useful in modeling many biological interactions. The solvents octanol and chloroform, have about equal HBD strength and thus will accommodate the hydrogen-bond acceptor (HBA) groups in solutes about equally well. Because the solvent octanol has a strong acceptor oxygen, solutes with HBD groups will favor it over chloroform on that basis. With its eight alkane carbons, octanol also favors solutes with a significant amount of alkane character, a property referred to in this paper as 'excess alkane affinity' (XAA). On the other hand, it is easier to form a cavity in the solvent chloroform, so larger solutes tend to favor that solvent. After allowing for XAA and molecular volume, the difference between log P(oct) and log P(clf) is a measure of the effective sum of HBD. This value is given the symbol epsilonalpha and appears to be on the same scale as Abraham's summation operatoralpha(2)(H).
16316975	Separate ion pathways in a Cl-/H+ exchanger.	CLC-ec1 is a prokaryotic CLC-type Cl(-)/H+ exchange transporter. Little is known about the mechanism of H+ coupling to Cl-. A critical glutamate residue, E148, was previously shown to be required for Cl(-)/H+ exchange by mediating proton transfer between the protein and the extracellular solution. To test whether an analogous H+ acceptor exists near the intracellular side of the protein, we performed a mutagenesis scan of inward-facing carboxyl-bearing residues and identified E203 as the unique residue whose neutralization abolishes H+ coupling to Cl- transport. Glutamate at this position is strictly conserved in all known CLCs of the transporter subclass, while valine is always found here in CLC channels. The x-ray crystal structure of the E203Q mutant is similar to that of the wild-type protein. Cl- transport rate in E203Q is inhibited at neutral pH, and the double mutant, E148A/E203Q, shows maximal Cl- transport, independent of pH, as does the single mutant E148A. The results argue that substrate exchange by CLC-ec1 involves two separate but partially overlapping permeation pathways, one for Cl- and one for H+. These pathways are congruent from the protein's extracellular surface to E148, and they diverge beyond this point toward the intracellular side. This picture demands a transport mechanism fundamentally different from familiar alternating-access schemes.
12056894	Organization of an efficient carbonic anhydrase: implications for the mechanism based on structure-function studies of a T199P/C206S mutant.	Substitution of Pro for Thr199 in the active site of human carbonic anhydrase II (HCA II)(1) reduces its catalytic efficiency about 3000-fold. X-ray crystallographic structures of the T199P/C206S variant have been determined in complex with the substrate bicarbonate and with the inhibitors thiocyanate and beta-mercaptoethanol. The latter molecule is normally not an inhibitor of wild-type HCA II. All three ligands display novel binding interactions to the T199P/C206S mutant. The beta-mercaptoethanol molecule binds in the active site area with its sulfur atom tetrahedrally coordinated to the zinc ion. Thiocyanate binds tetrahedrally coordinated to the zinc ion in T199P/C206S, in contrast to its pentacoordinated binding to the zinc ion in wild-type HCA II. Bicarbonate binds to the mutant with two of its oxygens at the positions of the zinc water (Wat263) and Wat318 in wild-type HCA II. The environment of this area is more hydrophilic than the normal bicarbonate-binding site of HCA II situated in the hydrophobic part of the cavity normally occupied by the so-called deep water (Wat338). The observation of a new binding site for bicarbonate has implications for understanding the mechanism by which the main-chain amino group of Thr199 acquired an important role for orientation of the substrate during the evolution of the enzyme.
1931963	Structural basis for broad specificity in alpha-lytic protease mutants.	Binding pocket mutants of alpha-lytic protease (Met 192----Ala and Met 213----Ala) have been constructed recently in an effort to create a protease specific for Met just prior to the scissile bond. Instead, mutation resulted in proteases with extraordinarily broad specificity profiles and high activity [Bone, R., Silen, J. L., & Agard, D. A. (1989) Nature 339, 191-195]. To understand the structural basis for the unexpected specificity profiles of these mutants, high-resolution X-ray crystal structures have been determined for complexes of each mutant with a series of systematically varying peptidylboronic acids. These inhibitory analogues of high-energy reaction intermediates provide models for how substrates with different side chains interact with the enzyme during the transition state. Fifteen structures have been analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively with respect to enzyme-inhibitor hydrogen-bond lengths, buried hydrophobic surface area, unfilled cavity volume, and the magnitude of inhibitor accommodating conformational adjustments (particularly in the region of another binding pocket residue, Val 217A). Comparison of these four parameters with the Ki of each inhibitor and the kcat and Km of the analogous substrates indicates that while no single structural parameter consistently correlates with activity or inhibition, the observed data can be understood as a combination of effects. Furthermore, the relative contribution of each term differs for the three enzymes, reflecting the altered conformational energetics of each mutant. From the extensive structural analysis, it is clear that enzyme flexibility, especially in the region of Val 217A, is primarily responsible for the exceptionally broad specificity observed in either mutant. Taken together, the observed patterns of substrate specificity can be understood to arise directly from interactions between the substrate and the residues lining the specificity pocket and indirectly from interactions between peripheral regions of the protein and the active-site region that serve to modulate active-site flexibility.
15299479	Crystal structure of chloromuconate cycloisomerase from Alcaligenes eutrophus JMP134 (pJP4) at 3 A resolution.	Chloromuconate cycloisomerase (E.C. 5.5.1.7) is an enzyme involved in the 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetate degradation pathway of Alcaligenes eutrophus JMP134 (pJP4). The crystal structure of this protein was determined at 3 A resolution by molecular-replacement techniques using atomic coordinates from the reported crystal structure of the homologous muconate cycloisomerase (E.C. 5.5.1.1) from Pseudomonas putida as the search model (42% identical positions in the sequences). Structure refinement by simulated-annealing and restrained least-squares techniques converged at R = 0.195. In the crystals studied, space group I4, the protein is present as two octamers per unit cell with two subunits per asymmetric unit. Each subunit consists of two globular domains, one of which forms an alpha/beta-barrel. Comparison of this structure with that of muconate cycloisomerase reveals the reasons for the altered substrate specificity of chloromuconate cycloisomerase. Marked differences are observed in polarity, accessibility and hydrogen-bonding potential in the channel leading into the active site as well as in the active center itself.
8880915	Coupling between trans/cis proline isomerization and protein stability in staphylococcal nuclease.	The nucleases A produced by two strains of Staphylococcus aureus, which have different stabilities, differ only in the identity of the single amino acid at residue 124. The nuclease from the Foggi strain of S. aureus (by convention nuclease WT), which contains His124, is 1.9 kcal.mol-1 less stable (at pH 5.5 and 20 degrees C) than the nuclease from the V8 strain (by convention nuclease H124L), which contains Leu124. In addition, the population of the trans conformer at the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond, as observed by NMR spectroscopy, is different for the two variants: about 15% for nuclease WT and 9% for nuclease H124L. In order to improve our understanding of the origin of these differences, we compared the properties of WT and H124L with those of the H124A and H124I variants. We discovered a correlation between effects of different residues at this position on protein stability and on stabilization of the cis configuration of the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond. In terms of free energy, approximately 17% of the increase in protein stability manifests itself as stabilization of the cis configuration at Lys116-Pro117. This result implies that the differences in stability arise mainly from structural differences between the cis configurational isomers at Pro117 of the different variants at residue 124. We solved the X-ray structure of the cis form of the most stable variant, H124L, and compared it with the published high-resolution X-ray structure of the cis form of the most stable variant, WT (Hynes TR, Fox RO, 1991, Proteins Struct Funct Genet 10:92-105). The two structures are identical within experimental error, except for the side chain at residue 124, which is exposed in the models of both variants. Thus, the increased stability and changes in the trans/cis equilibrium of the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond observed in H124L relative to WT are due to subtle structural changes that are not observed by current structure determination technique. Residue 124 is located in a helix. However, the stability changes are too large and follow the wrong order of stability to be explained simply by differences in helical propensity. A second site of conformational heterogeneity in native nuclease is found at the His46-Pro47 peptide bond, which is approximately 80% trans in both WT and H124L. Because proline to glycine substitutions at either residue 47 or 117 remove the structural heterogeneity at that position and increase protein stability, we determined the X-ray structures of H124L + P117G and H124L + P47G + P117G and the kinetic parameters of H124L, H124L + P47G, H124L + P117G, and H124L + P47G + P117G. The individual P117G and P47G mutations cause decreases in nuclease activity, with kcat affected more than Km, and their effects are additive. The P117G mutation in nuclease H124L leads to the same local conformational rearrangement described for the P117G mutant of WT (Hynes TR, Hodel A, Fox RO, 1994, Biochemistry 33:5021-5030). In both P117G mutants, the loop formed by residues 112-117 is located closer to the adjacent loop formed by residues 77-85, and residues 115-118 adopt a type I' beta-turn conformation with the Lys116-Gly117 peptide bond in the trans configuration, as compared with the parent protein in which these residues have a typeVIa beta-turn conformation with the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond in the cis configuration. Addition of the P47G mutation appears not to cause any additional structural changes. However, the electron density for part of the loop containing this peptide bond was not strong enough to be interpreted.
8805568	Structure of unliganded HIV-1 reverse transcriptase at 2.7 A resolution: implications of conformational changes for polymerization and inhibition mechanisms.	BACKGROUND: HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) is a major target for anti-HIV drugs. A considerable amount of information about the structure of RT is available, both unliganded and in complex with template-primer or non-nucleoside RT inhibitors (NNRTIs). But significant conformational differences in the p66 polymerase domain among the unliganded structures have complicated the interpretation of these data, leading to different proposals for the mechanisms of polymerization and inhibition. RESULTS: We report the structure of an unliganded RT at 2.7 A resolution, crystallized in space group C2 with a crystal packing similar to that of the RT-NNRTI complexes. The p66 thumb subdomain is folded into the DNA-binding cleft. Comparison of the unliganded RT structures with the DNA-bound RT and the NNRTI-bound RT structures reveals that the p66 thumb subdomain can exhibit two different upright conformations. In the DNA-bound RT, the p66 thumb subdomain adopts an upright position that can be described as resulting from a rigid-body rotation of the p66 thumb along the "thumb's knuckle' located near residues Trp239 (in strand beta 14) and Val317 (in beta 15) compared with the thumb position in the unliganded RT structure. NNRTI binding induces an additional hinge movement of the p66 thumb near the thumb's knuckle, causing the p66 thumb to adopt a configuration that is even more extended than in the DNA-bound RT structure. CONCLUSIONS: The p66 thumb subdomain is extremely flexible. NNRTI binding induces both short-range and long-range structural distortions in several domains of RT, which are expected to alter the position and conformation of the template-primer. These changes may account for the inhibition of polymerization and the alteration of the cleavage specificity of RNase H by NNRTI binding.
16221761	Structure and metal-dependent mechanism of peptidoglycan deacetylase, a streptococcal virulence factor.	Streptococcus pneumoniae peptidoglycan GlcNAc deacetylase (SpPgdA) protects the Gram-positive bacterial cell wall from host lysozymes by deacetylating peptidoglycan GlcNAc residues. Deletion of the pgda gene has been shown to result in hypersensitivity to lysozyme and reduction of infectivity in a mouse model. SpPgdA is a member of the family 4 carbohydrate esterases, for which little structural information exists, and no catalytic mechanism has yet been defined. Here we describe the native crystal structure and product complexes of SpPgdA biochemical characterization and mutagenesis. The structural data show that SpPgdA is an elongated three-domain protein in the crystal. The structure, in combination with mutagenesis, shows that SpPgdA is a metalloenzyme using a His-His-Asp zinc-binding triad with a nearby aspartic acid and histidine acting as the catalytic base and acid, respectively, somewhat similar to other zinc deacetylases such as LpxC. The enzyme is able to accept GlcNAc(3) as a substrate (K(m) = 3.8 mM, k(cat) = 0.55 s(-1)), with the N-acetyl of the middle sugar being removed by the enzyme. The data described here show that SpPgdA and the other family 4 carbohydrate esterases are metalloenzymes and present a step toward identification of mechanism-based inhibitors for this important class of enzymes.
9179777	Crystal structure of the bovine alpha-chymotrypsin:Kunitz inhibitor complex. An example of multiple protein:protein recognition sites.	The crystal structure of bovine alpha-chymotrypsin (alpha-CHT) in complex with the bovine basic pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) has been solved and refined at 2.8 A resolution (R-factor = 0.18). The proteinase:inhibitor complex forms a compact dimer (two alpha-CHT and two BPTI molecules), which may be stabilized by surface-bound sulphate ions, in the crystalline state. Each BPTI molecule, at opposite ends, is contacting both proteinase molecules in the dimer, through the reactive site loop and through residues next to the inhibitor's C-terminal region. Specific recognition between alpha-CHT and BPTI occurs at the (re)active site interface according to structural rules inferred from the analysis of homologous serine proteinase:inhibitor complexes. Lys15, the P1 residue of BPTI, however, does not occupy the alpha-CHT S1 specificity pocket, being hydrogen bonded to backbone atoms of the enzyme surface residues Gly216 and Ser217.
11349148	Structural mechanism for statin inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase.	HMG-CoA (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A) reductase (HMGR) catalyzes the committed step in cholesterol biosynthesis. Statins are HMGR inhibitors with inhibition constant values in the nanomolar range that effectively lower serum cholesterol levels and are widely prescribed in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia. We have determined structures of the catalytic portion of human HMGR complexed with six different statins. The statins occupy a portion of the binding site of HMG-CoA, thus blocking access of this substrate to the active site. Near the carboxyl terminus of HMGR, several catalytically relevant residues are disordered in the enzyme-statin complexes. If these residues were not flexible, they would sterically hinder statin binding.
12652322	Substrate-induced transmembrane signaling in the cobalamin transporter BtuB.	The outer membranes of Gram-negative bacteria possess transport proteins essential for uptake of scarce nutrients. In TonB-dependent transporters, a conserved sequence of seven residues, the Ton box, faces the periplasm and interacts with the inner membrane TonB protein to energize an active transport cycle. A critical mechanistic step is the structural change in the Ton box of the transporter upon substrate binding; this essential transmembrane signaling event increases the affinity of the transporter for TonB and enables active transport to proceed. We have solved crystal structures of BtuB, the outer membrane cobalamin transporter from Escherichia coli, in the absence and presence of cyanocobalamin (vitamin B(12)). In these structures, the Ton box is ordered and undergoes a conformational change in the presence of bound substrate. Calcium has been implicated as a necessary factor for the high-affinity binding (K(d) approximately 0.3 nM) of cyanocobalamin to BtuB. We observe two bound calcium ions that order three extracellular loops of BtuB, thus providing a direct (and unusual) structural role for calcium.
9772165	Crystal structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase in complex with carboxanilide derivatives.	The carboxanilides are nonnucleoside inhibitors (NNIs) of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT), of potential clinical importance. The compounds differ in potency and in their retention of potency in the face of drug resistance mutations. Whereas UC-84, the prototype compound, only weakly inhibits many RTs bearing single point resistance mutations, inhibition by UC-781 is little affected. It has been proposed that UC-38 and UC-781 may form quaternary complexes with RT at a site other than the known binding pocket of other NNIs. X-ray crystal structures of four HIV-1 RT-carboxanilide complexes (UC-10, UC-38, UC-84, and UC-781) reported here reveal that all four inhibitors bind in the usual NNI site, forming binary 1:1 complexes with RT in the absence of substrates with the amide/thioamide bond in cis conformations. For all four complexes the anilide rings of the inhibitors overlap aromatic rings of many other NNIs bound to RT. In contrast, the second rings of UC-10, UC-84, and UC-781 do not bind in equivalent positions to those of other "two-ring" NNIs such as alpha-APA or HEPT derivatives. The binding modes most closely resemble that of the structurally dissimilar NNI, Cl-TIBO, with a common hydrogen bond between each carboxanilide NH- group and the main-chain carbonyl oxygen of Lys101. The binding modes differ slightly between the UC-10/UC-781 and UC-38/UC-84 pairs of compounds, apparently related to the shorter isopropylmethanoyl substituents of the anilide rings of UC-38/UC-84, which draws these rings closer to residues Tyr181 and Tyr188. This in turn explains the differences in the effect of mutated residues on the binding of these compounds.
2215649	High specificity of a phosphate transport protein determined by hydrogen bonds.	Transport of the essential nutrient phosphorus--primarily in the form of orthophosphate--into cells and organelles is highly specific. This is exemplified by the uptake of phosphate or its close analogue arsenate by bacterial cells by way of a high affinity active transport system dependent on a phosphate-binding protein; this system is unable to recognize other inorganic oxyanions and is, moreover, distinct from the one for sulphate transport. The phosphate-binding protein is a member of a family of periplasmic proteins acting as initial high-affinity receptors for the osmotic shock-sensitive active transport systems or permeases for various sugars, amino acids, oligopeptides, and oxyanions. We report here the highly refined 1.7 A resolution X-ray structure of the liganded form of the phosphate-binding protein. The structure reveals the atomic features responsible for phosphate selectivity, either in monobasic or dibasic form, and the exclusion of sulphate. These features are fundamental to understanding phosphate transport systems and molecular recognition of charged substrates or ions in other biological processes.
2156077	Analysis of the structure of a common cold virus, human rhinovirus 14, refined at a resolution of 3.0 A.	Human rhinovirus 14 has a pseudo T = 3 icosahedral structure in which 60 copies of the three larger capsid proteins VP1, VP2 and VP3 are arranged in an icosahedral surface lattice, reminiscent of T = 3 viruses such as tomato bushy stunt virus and southern bean mosaic virus. The overall secondary and tertiary structures of VP1, VP2 and VP3 are very similar. The structure of human rhinovirus 14, which was refined at a resolution of 3.0 A [R = 0.16 for reflections with F greater than 3 sigma(F)], is here analyzed in detail. Quantitative analysis of the surface areas of contact (proportional to hydrophobic free energy of association) supports the previously assigned arrangement within the promoter, in which interactions between VP1 and VP3 predominate. Major contacts among VP1, VP2 and VP3 are between the beta-barrel moieties. VP4 is associated with the capsid interior by a distributed network of contacts with VP1, VP2 and VP3 within a promoter. As the virion assembly proceeds, the solvent-accessible surface area becomes increasingly hydrophilic in character. A mixed parallel and antiparallel seven-stranded sheet is composed of the beta C, beta H, beta E and beta F strands of VP3 in one pentamer and beta A1 and beta A2 of VP2 and the VP1 amino terminus in another pentamer. This association plays an essential role in holding pentamers together in the mature virion as this contact region includes more than half of the total short non-bonded contacts between pentamers. Contacts between protomers within pentamers are more extensive than the contacts between pentamers, accounting in part for the stability of pentamers. The previously identified immunogenic regions are correlated with high solvent accessibility, accessibility to large probes and also high thermal parameters. Surface residues in the canyon, the putative cellular receptor recognition site, have lower thermal parameters than other portions of the human rhinovirus 14 surface. Many of the water molecules in the ordered solvent model are located at subunit interfaces. A number of unusual crevices exist in the protein shell of human rhinovirus 14, including the hydrophobic pocket in VP1 which is the locus of binding for the WIN antiviral agents. These may be required for conformational flexibility during assembly and disassembly. The structures of the beta-barrels of human rhinovirus 14 VP1, VP2 and VP3 are compared with each other and with the southern bean mosaic virus coat protein.
2611204	Structural analysis of specificity: alpha-lytic protease complexes with analogues of reaction intermediates.	To better understand the structural basis of enzyme specificity, the structures of complexes formed between alpha-lytic protease, an extracellular serine protease of Lysobacter enzymogenes, and five inhibitory peptide boronic acids (R2-boroX, where R2 is methoxysuccinyl-Ala-Ala-Pro- and boroX is the alpha-aminoboronic acid analogue of Ala, Val, Ile, Norleu, or Phe) have been studied at high resolution by X-ray crystallography. The enzyme has primary specificity for Ala in the P1 position of peptide substrates with catalytic efficiency decreasing with increasing side-chain volume. Enzyme affinity for inhibitors with boroVal, boroIle, and boroPhe residues is much higher than expected on the basis of the catalytic efficiencies of homologous substrates. Covalent tetrahedral adducts are formed between the active-site serine and the boronic acid moieties of R2-boroAla, R2-boroVal R2-boroIle, and R2-boroNorleu. Though R2-boroVal is a slowly bound inhibitor and R2-boroAla is rapidly bound [Kettner, C. A., Bone, R., Agard, D. A., & Bachovchin, W. W. (1988) Biochemistry 27, 7682-7688], there appear to be no structural differences that could account for slow binding. The removal from solution of 20% more hydrophobic surface on binding accounts for the improved affinity of alpha-lytic protease for R2-boroVal relative to R2-boroAla. The high affinity of the enzyme for R2-boroIle derives from the selective binding of the L-allo stereoisomer of the boroIle residue, which can avoid bad steric interactions in the binding pocket.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
15549494	Structural and biochemical implications of single amino acid substitutions in the nucleotide-dependent switch regions of the nitrogenase Fe protein from Azotobacter vinelandii.	The structures of nitrogenase Fe proteins with defined amino acid substitutions in the previously implicated nucleotide-dependent signal transduction pathways termed switch I and switch II have been determined by X-ray diffraction methods. In the Fe protein of nitrogenase the nucleotide-dependent switch regions are responsible for communication between the sites responsible for nucleotide binding and hydrolysis and the [4Fe-4S] cluster of the Fe protein and the docking interface that interacts with the MoFe protein upon macromolecular complex formation. In this study the structural characterization of the Azotobacter vinelandii nitrogenase Fe protein with Asp at position 39 substituted by Asn in MgADP-bound and nucleotide-free states provides an explanation for the experimental observation that the altered Fe proteins form a trapped complex subsequent to a single electron transfer event. The structures reveal that the substitution allows the formation of a hydrogen bond between the switch I Asn39 and the switch II Asp125. In the structure of the native enzyme the analogous interaction between the side chains of Asp39 and Asp125 is precluded due to electrostatic repulsion. These results suggest that the electrostatic repulsion between Asp39 and Asp125 is important for dissociation of the Fe protein:MoFe protein complex during catalysis. In a separate study, the structural characterization of the Fe protein with Asp129 substituted by Glu provides the structural basis for the observation that the Glu129-substituted variant in the absence of bound nucleotides has biochemical properties in common with the native Fe protein with bound MgADP. Interactions of the longer Glu side chain with the phosphate binding loop (P-loop) results in a similar conformation of the switch II region as the conformation that results from the binding of the phosphate of ADP to the P-loop.
881731	Low resolution structure of human erythrocyte glutathione reductase.	null
8890910	X-ray structure of the ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase from the cyanobacterium Anabaena PCC 7119 at 1.8 A resolution, and crystallographic studies of NADP+ binding at 2.25 A resolution.	The crystal structure of the ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase (FNR) from the cyanobacterium Anabaena PCC 7119 has been determined at 2.6 A resolution by multiple isomorphous replacement and refined using 15.0 A to 1.8 A data, collected at 4 degrees C, to an R-factor of 0.172. The model includes 303 residues, the flavin adenine dinucleotide cofactor (FAD), one sulfate ion located at the putative NADP+ binding site and 328 water molecule sites. The structure of Anabaena FNR, including FAD, a network of intrinsic water molecules and a large hydrophobic cavity in the C-terminal domain, resembles that of the spinach enzyme. The major differences concern the additional short alpha-helix (residues 172 to 177 in Anabaena FNR) and residues Arg 100 and Arg 233 which binds NADP+ instead of Lys 116 and Lys 244 in the spinach enzyme. Crystals of a complex of Anabaena FNR with NADP+ were obtained. The model of the complex has been refined using 15 A to 2.25 A X-ray data, collected at -170 degrees C, to an R-factor of 0.186. This model includes 295 residues, FAD, the full NADP+ (with an occupancy of 0.8) and 444 water molecules. The 2'-5' adenine moiety of NADP+ binds to the protein as 2'-phospho-5'-AMP to the spinach FNR. The nicotinamide moiety is turned towards the surface of the protein instead of stacking onto the FAD isoalloxazine ring as would be required for hydride transfer. The model of the complex agrees with previous biochemical studies as residues Arg 100 and Arg 233 are involved in NADP+ binding and residues Arg77, Lys 53 and Lys 294, located on the FAD side of the enzyme, remain free to interact with ferredoxin and flavodoxin, the physiological partners of ferredoxin: NADP reductase.
8702816	Structural and functional characterization of OmpF porin mutants selected for larger pore size. I. Crystallographic analysis.	OmpF porin is a nonspecific pore protein from the outer membrane of Escherichia coli. Previously, a set of mutants was selected that allow the passage of long maltodextrins that do not translocate through the wild-type pore. Here, we describe the crystal structures of four point mutants and one deletion mutant from this set; their functional characterization is reported in the accompanying paper (Saint, N., Lou, K.-L., Widmer, C., Luckey, M., Schirmer, T., Rosenbusch, J. P. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 20676-20680). All mutations have a local effect on the structure of the pore constriction and result in a larger pore cross-section. Substitution of each of the three closely packed arginine residues at the pore constriction (Arg-42, Arg-82, and Arg-132) by shorter uncharged residues causes rearrangement of the adjacent basic residues. This demonstrates mutual stabilization of these residues in the wild-type porin. Deletion of six residues from the internal loop (Delta109-114) results in disorder of seven adjacent residues but does not alter the structure of the beta-barrel framework. Thus, the large hollow beta-barrel motif can be regarded as an autonomous structure.
15296730	Crystal structures of a ligand-free and malonate-bound human caspase-1: implications for the mechanism of substrate binding.	Caspase-1, a mediator of the posttranslational processing of IL-1beta and IL-18, requires an aspartic acid in the P1 position of its substrates. The mechanisms of caspase-1 activation remain poorly understood despite numerous structures of the enzyme complexed with aspartate-based inhibitors. Here we report a crystal structure of ligand-free caspase-1 that displays dramatic rearrangements of loops defining the active site to generate a closed conformation that is incompatible with substrate binding. A structure of the enzyme complexed with malonate shows the protein in its open (active-site ligand-bound) conformation in which malonate reproduces the hydrogen bonding network observed in structures with covalent inhibitors. These results illustrate the essential function of the obligatory aspartate recognition element that opens the active site of caspase-1 to substrates and may be the determinant responsible for the conformational changes between ligand-free and -bound forms of the enzyme, and suggest a new approach for identifying novel aspartic acid mimetics.
12203498	Substrate distortion by a beta-mannanase: snapshots of the Michaelis and covalent-intermediate complexes suggest a B(2,5) conformation for the transition state.	null
11106484	High-resolution structure of the HNF-1alpha dimerization domain.	The N-terminal dimerization domain of the transcriptional activator hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) is essential for DNA binding and association of the transcriptional coactivator, DCoH (dimerization cofactor of HNF-1). To investigate the basis for dimerization of HNF-1 proteins, we determined the 1.2 A resolution X-ray crystal structure of the dimerization domain of HNF-1alpha (HNF-p1). Phasing was facilitated by devising a simple synthesis for Fmoc-selenomethionine and substituting leucine residues with selenomethionine. The HNF-1 dimerization domain forms a unique, four-helix bundle that is preserved with localized conformational shifts in the DCoH complex. In three different crystal forms, HNF-p1 displays subtle shifts in the conformation of the interhelix loop and the crossing angle between the amino- and carboxyl-terminal helices. In all three crystal forms, the HNF-p1 dimers pair through an exposed hydrophobic surface that also forms the binding site for DCoH. Conserved core residues in the dimerization domain of the homologous transcriptional regulator HNF-1beta rationalize the functional heterodimerization of the HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta proteins. Mutations in HNF-1alpha are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3), and the structure of HNF-p1 provides insights into the effects of three MODY3 mutations.
10537112	Structural evidence for dimerization-regulated activation of an integral membrane phospholipase.	Dimerization is a biological regulatory mechanism employed by both soluble and membrane proteins. However, there are few structural data on the factors that govern dimerization of membrane proteins. Outer membrane phospholipase A (OMPLA) is an integral membrane enzyme which participates in secretion of colicins in Escherichia coli. In Campilobacter and Helicobacter pylori strains, OMPLA is implied in virulence. Its activity is regulated by reversible dimerization. Here we report X-ray structures of monomeric and dimeric OMPLA from E. coli. Dimer interactions occur almost exclusively in the apolar membrane-embedded parts, with two hydrogen bonds within the hydrophobic membrane area being key interactions. Dimerization results in functional oxyanion holes and substrate-binding pockets, which are absent in monomeric OMPLA. These results provide a detailed view of activation by dimerization of a membrane protein.
12205096	Crystal structure of ClpA, an Hsp100 chaperone and regulator of ClpAP protease.	Escherichia coli ClpA, an Hsp100/Clp chaperone and an integral component of the ATP-dependent ClpAP protease, participates in regulatory protein degradation and the dissolution and degradation of protein aggregates. The crystal structure of the ClpA subunit reveals an N-terminal domain with pseudo-twofold symmetry and two AAA(+) modules (D1 and D2) each consisting of a large and a small sub-domain with ADP bound in the sub-domain junction. The N-terminal domain interacts with the D1 domain in a manner similar to adaptor-binding domains of other AAA(+) proteins. D1 and D2 are connected head-to-tail consistent with a cooperative and vectorial translocation of protein substrates. In a planar hexamer model of ClpA, built by assembling ClpA D1 and D2 into homohexameric rings of known structures of AAA(+) modules, the differences in D1-D1 and D2-D2 interfaces correlate with their respective contributions to hexamer stability and ATPase activity.
7542140	Structure of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase in a complex with the non-nucleoside inhibitor alpha-APA R 95845 at 2.8 A resolution.	BACKGROUND: HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) is a multifunctional enzyme that copies the RNA genome of HIV-1 into DNA. It is a heterodimer composed of a 66 kDa (p66) and a 51 kDa (p51) subunit. HIV-1 RT is a crucial target for structure-based drug design, and potent inhibitors have been identified, whose efficacy, however, is limited by drug resistance. RESULTS: The crystal structure of HIV-1 RT in complex with the non-nucleoside inhibitor alpha-anilinophenyl-acetamide (alpha-APA) R95845 has been determined at 2.8 A resolution. The inhibitor binds in a hydrophobic pocket near the polymerase active site. The pocket contains five aromatic amino acid residues and the interactions of the side chains of these residues with the aromatic rings of non-nucleoside inhibitors appear to be important for inhibitor binding. Most of the amino acid residues where mutations have been correlated with high levels of resistance to non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 RT are located close to alpha-APA. The overall fold of HIV-1 RT in complex with alpha-APA is similar to that found when in complex with nevirapine, another non-nucleoside inhibitor, but there are significant conformational changes relative to an HIV-1 RT/DNA/Fab complex. CONCLUSIONS: The non-nucleoside inhibitor-binding pocket has a flexible structure whose mobility may be required for effective polymerization, and may be part of a hinge that permits relative movements of two subdomains of the p66 subunit denoted the 'palm' and 'thumb'. An understanding of the structure of the inhibitor-binding pocket, of the interactions between HIV-1 RT and alpha-APA, and of the locations of mutations that confer resistance to inhibitors provides a basis for structure-based design of chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of AIDS.
16483931	Structural and mechanistic insights into ras association domains of phospholipase C epsilon.	Ras proteins signal to a number of distinct pathways by interacting with diverse effectors. Studies of ras/effector interactions have focused on three classes, Raf kinases, ral guanylnucleotide-exchange factors, and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinases. Here we describe ras interactions with another effector, the recently identified phospholipase C epsilon (PLCepsilon). We solved structures of PLCepsilon RA domains (RA1 and RA2) by NMR and the structure of the RA2/ras complex by X-ray crystallography. Although the similarity between ubiquitin-like folds of RA1 and RA2 proves that they are homologs, only RA2 can bind ras. Some of the features of the RA2/ras interface are unique to PLCepsilon, while the ability to make contacts with both switch I and II regions of ras is shared only with phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase. Studies of PLCepsilon regulation suggest that, in a cellular context, the RA2 domain, in a mode specific to PLCepsilon, has a role in membrane targeting with further regulatory impact on PLC activity.
3476160	Protein engineering of subtilisin BPN': enhanced stabilization through the introduction of two cysteines to form a disulfide bond.	Introduction of a disulfide bond by site-directed mutagenesis was found to enhance the stability of subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) under a variety of conditions. The location of the new disulfide bond was selected with the aid of a computer program, which scored various sites according to the amount of distortion that an introduced disulfide linkage would create in a 1.3-A X-ray model of native subtilisin BPN'. Of the several amino acid pairs identified by this program as suitable candidates, Thr-22 and Ser-87 were selected by using the additional requirement that the individual cysteine substitutions occur at positions that exhibit some degree of variability in related subtilisin amino acid sequences. A subtilisin variant containing cysteine residues at positions 22 and 87 was created by site-directed mutagenesis and was shown to have an activity essentially equivalent to that of the wild-type enzyme. Differential scanning calorimetry experiments demonstrated the variant protein to have a melting temperature 3.1 degrees C higher than that of the wild-type protein and 5.8 degrees C higher than that of the reduced form (-SH HS-) of the variant protein. Kinetic experiments performed under a variety of conditions, including 8 M urea, showed that the Cys-22/Cys-87 disulfide variant undergoes thermal inactivation at half the rate of that of the wild-type enzyme. The increased thermal stability of this disulfide variant is consistent with a decrease in entropy for the unfolded state relative to the unfolded state that contains no cross-link, as would be predicted from the statistical thermodynamics of polymers.
12501175	The crystal structure of the H48Q active site mutant of human group IIA secreted phospholipase A2 at 1.5 A resolution provides an insight into the catalytic mechanism.	The human group IIA secreted PLA(2) is a 14 kDa calcium-dependent extracellular enzyme that has been characterized as an acute phase protein with important antimicrobial activity and has been implicated in signal transduction. The selective binding of this enzyme to the phospholipid substrate interface plays a crucial role in its physiological function. To study interfacial binding in the absence of catalysis, one strategy is to produce structurally intact but catalytically inactive mutants. The active site mutants H48Q, H48N, and H48A had been prepared for the secreted PLA(2)s from bovine pancreas and bee venom and retained minimal catalytic activity while the H48Q mutant showed the maximum structural integrity. Preparation of the mutant H48Q of the human group IIA enzyme unexpectedly produced an enzyme that retained significant (2-4%) catalytic activity that was contrary to expectations in view of the accepted catalytic mechanism. In this paper it is established that the high residual activity of the H48Q mutant is genuine, not due to contamination, and can be seen under a variety of assay conditions including assays in the presence of Co(2+) and Ni(2+) in place of Ca(2+). The crystallization of the H48Q mutant, yielding diffraction data to a resolution of 1.5 A, allowed a comparison with the corresponding recombinant wild-type enzyme (N1A) that was also crystallized. This comparison revealed that all of the important features of the catalytic machinery were in place and the two structures were virtually superimposable. In particular, the catalytic calcium ion occupied an identical position in the active site of the two proteins, and the catalytic water molecule (w6) was clearly resolved in the H48Q mutant. We propose that a variation of the calcium-coordinated oxyanion ("two water") mechanism involving hydrogen bonding rather than the anticipated full proton transfer to the histidine will best explain the ability of an active site glutamine to allow significant catalytic activity.
12083921	Pentalenene synthase. Analysis of active site residues by site-directed mutagenesis.	Incubation of farnesyl diphosphate (1) with the W308F or W308F/H309F mutants of pentalenene synthase, an enzyme from Streptomyces UC5319, yielded pentalenene (2), accompanied by varying proportions of (+)-germacrene A (7) with relatively minor changes in k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m). By contrast, single H309 mutants gave rise to both (+)-germacrene A (7) and protoilludene (8) in addition to pentalenene (2). Mutation to glutamate of each of the three aspartate residues in the Mg(2+)-binding aspartate-rich domain, (80)DDLFD, resulted in reduction in the k(cat)/K(m) for farnesyl diphosphate and formation of varying proportions of pentalenene and (+)-germacrene A (7). Formation of (+)-germacrene A (7) by the various pentalenene synthase mutants is the result of a derailment of the natural anti-Markovnikov cyclization reaction, and not simply the consequence of trapping of a normally cryptic, carbocationic intermediate. Both the N219A and N219L mutants of pentalenene synthase were completely inactive, while the corresponding N219D mutant had a k(cat)/K(m) which was 3300-fold lower than that of the wild-type synthase, and produced a mixture of pentalenene (2) (91%) and the aberrant cyclization product beta-caryophyllene (9) (9%). Finally, the F77Y mutant had a k(cat)/K(m) which was reduced by 20-fold compared to that of the wild-type synthase.
9032071	The crystal structure of the flavin containing enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A from Lactococcus lactis.	BACKGROUND:. Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHOD) is a flavin mononucleotide containing enzyme, which catalyzes the oxidation of (S)-dihydroorotate to orotate, the fourth step in the de novo biosynthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides. Lactococcus lactis contains two genes encoding different functional DHODs whose sequences are only 30% identical. One of these enzymes, DHODA, is a highly efficient dimer, while the other, DHODB, shows optimal activity only in the presence of an iron-sulphur cluster containing protein with which it forms a complex tetramer. Sequence alignments have identified three different families among the DHODs: the two L. lactis enzymes belong to two of the families, whereas the enzyme from E. coli is a representative of the third. As no three-dimensional structures of DHODs are currently available, we set out to determine the crystal structure of DHODA from L. lactis. The differences between the two L. lactis enzymes make them particularly interesting for studying flavoprotein redox reactions and for identifying the differences between the enzyme families. RESULTS:. The crystal structure of DHODA has been determined to 2.0  resolution. The enzyme is a dimer of two crystallographically independent molecules related by a non-crystallographic twofold axis. The protein folds into and alpha/beta barrel with the flavin molecule sitting between the top of the barrel and a subdomain formed by several barrel inserts. Above the flavin isoalloxazine ring there is a small water filled cavity, completely buried beneath the protein surface and surrounded by many conserved residues. This cavity is proposed as the substrate-binding site. CONCLUSIONS:. The crystal structure has allowed the function of many of the conserved residues in DHODs to be identified: many of these are associated with binding the flavin group. Important differences were identified in some of the active-site residues which vary across the distinct DHOD families, implying significant mechanistic differences. The substrate cavity, although buried, is located beneath a highly conserved loop which is much less ordered than the rest of the protein and may be important in giving access to the cavity. The location of the conserved residues surrounding this cavity suggests the potential orientation of the substrate.
11980702	Three-dimensional structure of the human transglutaminase 3 enzyme: binding of calcium ions changes structure for activation.	Transglutaminase (TGase) enzymes catalyze the formation of covalent cross-links between protein-bound glutamines and lysines in a calcium-dependent manner, but the role of Ca(2+) ions remains unclear. The TGase 3 isoform is widely expressed and is important for epithelial barrier formation. It is a zymogen, requiring proteolysis for activity. We have solved the three-dimensional structures of the zymogen and the activated forms at 2.2 and 2.1 A resolution, respectively, and examined the role of Ca(2+) ions. The zymogen binds one ion tightly that cannot be exchanged. Upon proteolysis, the enzyme exothermally acquires two more Ca(2+) ions that activate the enzyme, are exchangeable and are functionally replaceable by other lanthanide trivalent cations. Binding of a Ca(2+) ion at one of these sites opens a channel which exposes the key Trp236 and Trp327 residues that control substrate access to the active site. Together, these biochemical and structural data reveal for the first time in a TGase enzyme that Ca(2+) ions induce structural changes which at least in part dictate activity and, moreover, may confer substrate specificity.
10429209	Structural and kinetic analysis of drug resistant mutants of HIV-1 protease.	Mutants of HIV-1 protease that are commonly selected on exposure to different drugs, V82S, G48V, N88D and L90M, showed reduced catalytic activity compared to the wild-type protease on cleavage site peptides, CA-p2, p6pol-PR and PR-RT, critical for viral maturation. Mutant V82S is the least active (2-20% of wild-type protease), mutants N88D, R8Q, and L90M exhibit activities ranging from 20 to 40% and G48V from 50 to 80% of the wild-type activity. In contrast, D30N is variable in its activity on different substrates (10-110% of wild-type), with the PR-RT site being the most affected. Mutants K45I and M46L, usually selected in combination with other mutations, showed activities that are similar to (60-110%) or greater than (110-530%) wild-type, respectively. No direct relationship was observed between catalytic activity, inhibition, and structural stability. The mutants D30N and V82S were similar to wild-type protease in their stability toward urea denaturation, while R8Q, G48V, and L90M showed 1.5 to 2.7-fold decreased stability, and N88D and K45I showed 1.6 to 1.7-fold increased stability. The crystal structures of R8Q, K45I and L90M mutants complexed with a CA-p2 analog inhibitor were determined at 2.0, 1.55 and 1.88 A resolution, respectively, and compared to the wild-type structure. The intersubunit hydrophobic contacts observed in the crystal structures are in good agreement with the relative structural stability of the mutant proteases. All these results suggest that viral resistance does not arise by a single mechanism.
9041631	The NMR side-chain assignments and solution structure of enzyme IIBcellobiose of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system of Escherichia coli.	The assignment of the side-chain NMR resonances and the determination of the three-dimensional solution structure of the C10S mutant of enzyme IIBcellobiose (IIBcel) of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system of Escherichia coli are presented. The side-chain resonances were assigned nearly completely using a variety of mostly heteronuclear NMR experiments, including HCCH-TOCSY, HCCH-COSY, and COCCH-TOCSY experiments as well as CBCACOHA, CBCA(CO)NH, and HBHA(CBCA)(CO)NH experiments. In order to obtain the three-dimensional structure, NOE data were collected from 15N-NOESY-HSQC, 13C-HSQC-NOESY, and 2D NOE experiments. The distance restraints derived from these NOE data were used in distance geometry calculations followed by molecular dynamics and simulated annealing protocols. In an iterative procedure, additional NOE assignments were derived from the calculated structures and new structures were calculated. The final set of structures, calculated with approximately 2000 unambiguous and ambiguous distance restraints, has an rms deviation of 1.1 A on C alpha atoms. IIBcel consists of a four stranded parallel beta-sheet, in the order 2134. The sheet is flanked with two and three alpha-helices on either side. Residue 10, a cysteine in the wild-type enzyme, which is phosphorylated during the catalytic cycle, is located at the end of the first beta-strand. A loop that is proposed to be involved in the binding of the phosphoryl-group follows the cysteine. The loop appears to be disordered in the unphosphorylated state.
8627629	H NMR study of the solution structure of Ac-AMP2, a sugar binding antimicrobial protein isolated from Amaranthus caudatus.	The conformation in water of antimicrobial protein 2 from Amaranthus caudatus (Ac-AMP2) was determined using 1H NMR, DIANA and restrained molecular modeling. Ac-AMP2 is a 30 amino acid residue, lectin-like protein that specifically binds to chitin, a polymer of beta-1,4-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine. After sequence specific resonance assignments, a total of 198 distance restraints were collected from 2D NOESY buildup spectra at 500 MHz at pH 2, supplemented by a 2D NOESY spectrum at 600 MHz. The location of the three previously unassigned disulfide bridges was determined from preliminary DIANA structures, using a statistical analysis of intercystinyl distances. The solution structure of Ac-AMP2 is presented as a set of 26 DIANA structures, further refined by restrained molecular dynamics using a simulated annealing protocol in the AMBER force field, with a backbone r.m.s.d. for the well defined Glu3-Cys28 segment of 0.69(+/-0.12) angstroms. The main structural element is an antiparallel beta-sheet from Met13 to Lys23 including a betaI-turn over Gln17-Phel8 with a beta bulge at Gly19. In addition, a beta'I turn over Arg6-Gly7, a beta'III turn over Ser11-Gly12 and a helical turn from Gly24 to Cys28 are identified. This structure is very similar to the equivalent regions of the X-ray structure of wheat germ agglutinin and the NMR structure of hevein.
15629661	Crystal structures of the signal transducing protein GlnK from Thermus thermophilus HB8.	The Thermus thermophilus HB8 genome encodes a signal transducing PII protein, GlnK. The crystal structures of GlnK have been determined in two different space groups, P2(1)2(1)2(1) and P3(1)21. The PII protein has the T-loop, which is essential for interactions with receptor proteins. In both crystal forms, three GlnK molecules form a trimer in the asymmetric unit. In one P2(1)2(1)2(1) crystal form, the three T-loops in the trimer are disordered, while in another P2(1)2(1)2(1) crystal form, the T-loop from one molecule in the trimer is ordered. In the P3(1)21 crystal, one T-loop is ordered while the other two T-loops are disordered. The conformations of the ordered T-loops significantly differ between the two crystal forms; one makes the alpha-helix in the middle of the T-loop, while the other has an extension of the beta-hairpin. Two different conformations are captured by the crystal contacts. The observation of multiple T-loop conformations suggests that the T-loop could potentially exhibit "polysterism," which would be important for interactions with receptor proteins. The crystal structures of the nucleotide-bound forms, GlnK.ATP and GlnK.ADP, have also been determined. ATP/ADP binding within a cleft at the interface of two adjacent T. thermophilus GlnK monomers might affect the conformation of the T-loop.
7743135	Three-dimensional structure of the diphtheria toxin repressor in complex with divalent cation co-repressors.	BACKGROUND: When Corynebacterium diphtheriae encounters an environment with a low concentration of iron ions, it initiates the synthesis of several virulence factors, including diphtheria toxin. The diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR) plays a key role in this iron-dependent, global regulatory system and is the prototype for a new family of iron-dependent repressor proteins in Gram-positive bacteria. This study aimed to increase understanding of the general regulatory principles of cation binding to DtxR. RESULTS: The crystal structure of dimeric DtxR holo-repressor in complex with different transition metals shows that each subunit comprises an amino-terminal DNA-binding domain, an interface domain (which contains two metal-binding sites) and a third, very flexible carboxy-terminal domain. Each DNA-binding domain contains a helix-turn-helix motif and has a topology which is very similar to catabolite gene activator protein (CAP). Molecular modeling suggests that bound DNA adopts a bent conformation with helices alpha 3 of DtxR interacting with the major grooves. The two metal-binding sites lie approximately 10 A apart. Binding site 2 is positioned at a potential hinge region between the DNA-binding and interface domains. Residues 98-108 appear to be crucial for the functioning of the repressor; these provide four of the ligands of the two metal-binding sites and three residues at the other side of the helix which are at the heart of the dimer interface. CONCLUSIONS: The crystal structure of the DtxR holorepressor suggests that the divalent cation co-repressor controls motions of the DNA-binding domain. In this way the metal co-repressor governs the distance between operator recognition elements in the two subunits and, consequently, DNA recognition.
1538395	Crystallization of beta-galactosidase from Escherichia coli.	Two crystal forms of beta-galactosidase have been obtained from Escherichia coli. One crystal form is hexagonal space group P6222 or enantiomorph, with cell dimensions a = b = 154 A, c = 750 A. The second form is monoclinic, space group P21, with cell dimensions a = 107.9 A, b = 207.5 A, c = 509.9 A, beta = 94.7 degrees. The monoclinic form seems better suited to detailed structural analysis. The crystals are radiation-sensitive, but by using synchrotron radiation in conjunction with a long (400 mm) crystal-to-film distance it was possible to resolve the individual reflections. On the basis of crystal density measurements, there are four tetramers each of molecular weight 465,000 per asymmetric unit. The Patterson function strongly suggests that two of the tetramers are related to the other two by translation. The data are consistent with the tetramers having 222 point symmetry, but this is not proven.
9878371	The R78K and D117E active-site variants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae soluble inorganic pyrophosphatase: structural studies and mechanistic implications.	We have solved the structure of two active-site variants of soluble inorganic pyrophosphatases (PPase), R78K and D117K, at resolutions of 1.85 and 2.15 A and R-factors of 19.5% and 18.3%, respectively.In the R78K variant structure, the high-affinity phosphate group (P1) is missing, consistent with the wild-type structure showing a bidentate interaction between P1 and Arg78, and solution data showing a decrease in P1 affinity in the variant. The structure explains why the mutation affects P1 and pyrophosphate binding much more than would be expected by the loss of one hydrogen bond: Lys78 forms an ion-pair with Asp71, precluding an interaction with P1. The R78K variant also provides the first direct evidence that the low-affinity phosphate group (P2) can adopt the structure that we believe is the immediate product of hydrolysis, with one of the P2 oxygen atoms co-ordinated to both activating metal ions (M1 and M2). If so, the water molecule (Wat1) between M1 and M2 in wild-type PPase is, indeed, the attacking nucleophile.The D117E variant structure likewise supports our model of catalysis, as the Glu117 variant carboxylate group is positioned where Wat1 is in the wild-type: the potent Wat1 nucleophile is replaced by a carboxylate co-ordinated to two metal ions. Alternative confirmations of Glu117 may allow Wat1 to be present but at much reduced occupancy, explaining why the pKa of the nucleophile increases by three pH units, even though there is relatively little distortion of the active site.These new structures, together with parallel functional studies measuring catalytic efficiency and ligand (metal ion, PPi and Pi) binding, provide strong evidence against a proposed mechanism in which Wat1 is considered unimportant for hydrolysis. They thus support the notion that PPase shares mechanistic similarity with the "two-metal ion" mechanism of polymerases.
16008357	Structure-based engineering of internal cavities in coiled-coil peptides.	Cavities and clefts are frequently important sites of interaction between natural enzymes or receptors and their corresponding substrate or ligand molecules and exemplify the types of molecular surfaces that would facilitate engineering of artificial catalysts and receptors. Even so, structural characterizations of designed cavities are rare. To address this issue, we performed a systematic study of the structural effects of single-amino acid substitutions within the hydrophobic cores of tetrameric coiled-coil peptides. Peptides containing single glycine, serine, alanine, or threonine amino acid substitutions at the buried L9, L16, L23, and I26 hydrophobic core positions of a GCN4-based sequence were synthesized and studied by solution-phase and crystallographic techniques. All peptides adopt the expected tetrameric state and contain tunnels or internal cavities ranging in size from 80 to 370 A(3). Two closely related sequences containing an L16G substitution, one of which adopts an antiparallel configuration and one of which adopts a parallel configuration, illustrate that cavities of different volumes and shapes can be engineered from identical core substitutions. Finally, we demonstrate that two of the peptides (L9G and L9A) bind the small molecule iodobenzene when present during crystallization, leaving the general peptide quaternary structure intact but altering the local peptide conformation and certain superhelical parameters. These high-resolution descriptions of varied molecular surfaces within solvent-occluded internal cavities illustrate the breadth of design space available in even closely related peptides and offer valuable models for the engineering of de novo helical proteins.
14636605	Stabilization of a tetrameric malate dehydrogenase by introduction of a disulfide bridge at the dimer-dimer interface.	Malate dehydrogenase (MDH) from the moderately thermophilic bacterium Chloroflexus aurantiacus (CaMDH) is a tetrameric enzyme, while MDHs from mesophilic organisms usually are dimers. To investigate the potential contribution of the extra dimer-dimer interface in CaMDH with respect to thermal stability, we have engineered an intersubunit disulfide bridge designed to strengthen dimer-dimer interactions. The resulting mutant (T187C, containing two 187-187 disulfide bridges in the tetramer) showed a 200-fold increase in half-life at 75 degrees C and an increase of 15 deg. C in apparent melting temperature compared to the wild-type. The crystal structure of the mutant (solved at 1.75 A resolution) was essentially identical with that of the wild-type, with the exception of the added inter-dimer disulfide bridge and the loss of an aromatic intra-dimer contact. Remarkably, the mutant and the wild-type had similar temperature optima and activities at their temperature optima, thus providing a clear case of uncoupling of thermal stability and thermoactivity. The results show that tetramerization may contribute to MDH stability to an extent that depends strongly on the number of stabilizing interactions in the dimer-dimer interface.
11420435	The energetic cost of induced fit catalysis: Crystal structures of trypsinogen mutants with enhanced activity and inhibitor affinity.	The contribution of induced fit to enzyme specificity has been much debated, although with little experimental data. Here we probe the effect of induced fit on enzyme specificity using the trypsin(ogen) system. BPTI is known to induce trypsinogen to assume a trypsinlike conformation. Correlations are observed between BPTI affinity and the values of k(cat)/K(m) for the hydrolysis of two substrates by eight trypsin(ogen) variants. The slope of both correlations is -1.8. The crystal structures of the BPTI complexes of four variant trypsinogens were also solved. Three of these enzymes, K15A, DeltaI16V17/D194N, and DeltaI16V17/Q156K trypsinogen, are 10- to 100-fold more active than trypsinogen. The fourth variant, DeltaI16V17 trypsinogen, is the lone outlier in the correlations; its activity is lower than expected based on its affinity for BPTI. The S1 site and oxyanion hole, formed by segments 184A-194 and 216-223, are trypsinlike in all of the enzymes. These structural and kinetic data confirm that BPTI induces an active conformation in the trypsin(ogen) variants. Thus, changes in BPTI affinity monitor changes in the energetic cost of inducing a trypsinlike conformation. Although the S1 site and oxyanion hole are similar in all four variants, the N-terminal and autolysis loop (residues 142-152) segments have different interactions for each variant. These results indicate that zymogen activity is controlled by a simple conformational equilibrium between active and inactive conformations, and that the autolysis loop and N-terminal segments control this equilibrium. Together, these data illustrate that induced fit does not generally contribute to enzyme specificity.
16245921	Solution NMR structures of IgG binding domains with artificially evolved high levels of sequence identity but different folds.	We describe here the solution NMR structures of two IgG binding domains with highly homologous sequences but different three-dimensional structures. The proteins, G311 and A219, are derived from the IgG binding domains of their wild-type counterparts, protein G and protein A, respectively. Through a series of site-directed mutations and phage display selections, the sequences of G311 and A219 were designed to converge to a point of high-level sequence identity while keeping their respective wild-type tertiary folds. Structures of both artificially evolved sequences were determined by NMR spectroscopy. The main chain fold of G311 can be superimposed on the wild-type alpha/beta protein G structure with a backbone rmsd of 1.4 A, and the A219 structure can be overlaid on the wild-type three-alpha-helix protein A fold also with a backbone rmsd of 1.4 A. The structure of G311, in particular, accommodates a large number of mutational changes without undergoing a change in the overall fold of the main chain. The structural differences are maintained despite a high level (59%) of sequence identity. These proteins serve as starting points for further experiments that will probe basic concepts of protein folding and conformational switching.
12731868	Crystal structures of the ribonuclease MC1 mutants N71T and N71S in complex with 5'-GMP: structural basis for alterations in substrate specificity.	Ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1), isolated from bitter gourd seeds, is a uridine specific RNase belonging to the RNase T2 family. Mutations of Asn71 in RNase MC1 to the amino acids Thr (N71T) and Ser (N71S) in guanosine preferential RNases altered the substrate specificity from uridine specific to guanosine specific, as shown by the transphosphorylation of diribonucleoside monophosphates [Numata, T., et al. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 524-530]. To elucidate the structural basis for the alteration of substrate specificity, crystal structures of the RNase MC1 mutants N71T and N71S, free or complexed with 5'-GMP, were determined at resolutions higher than 2 A. In the N71T-5'-GMP and N71S-5'-GMP complexes, the guanine moiety was, as in the case of the uracil moiety bound to wild-type RNase MC1, firmly stabilized in the B2 site by an extensive network of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions. Structure comparisons showed that mutations of Asn71 to Thr or Ser cause an enlargement of the B2 site, which then make it feasible to insert a guanine base into the B2 site of mutants N71T and N71S. This binding further allows for hydrogen bonding interaction of the side chain hydroxyl groups of Thr71 or Ser71 with the N7 atom of the guanine base. The mode of guanine binding of mutants N71T and N71S was found to be essentially identical to that of a guanosine preferential RNase NW from Nicotiana glutinosa. In particular, hydrogen bonds between the N7 atom of the guanine base and the hydroxyl groups of the amino acids at position 71 (RNase MC1 numbering) were completely conserved in three guanosine preferential enzymes, thereby indicating that the hydrogen bond may play an essential role in guanine binding in guanosine preferential RNases in the RNase T2 family. Consequently, it can be concluded that amino acids at position 71 (RNase MC1 numbering) serve as one of the determinants for substrate specificity (or preference) in the RNase T2 fimily by changing the size and shape of the B2 site.
8157648	Identical mutations at corresponding positions in two homologous proteins with nonidentical effects.	The x-ray structure of a mutant (Gly72 to Asp) of the Escherichia coli ribose-binding protein with altered transport function has been solved and refined to 2.2-A resolution with a conventional R-factor (R-factor = [formula: see text]) of 16.0% and good stereochemistry. Comparison with the wild type ribose-binding protein shows that the structure is disturbed little at the actual mutation site, but quite appreciably in a neighboring loop. Changes in the surface of the protein at the site of mutation, however, seem to explain the functional effects. A corresponding mutation of the related glucose/galactose-binding protein has different structural and functional effects due to the different structural context of the mutation site in that protein. These results are consistent with the concept that these proteins have slightly different ways of interacting with the membrane components in transport and chemotaxis.
10618385	NMR solution structure of the human prion protein.	The NMR structures of the recombinant human prion protein, hPrP(23-230), and two C-terminal fragments, hPrP(90-230) and hPrP(121-230), include a globular domain extending from residues 125-228, for which a detailed structure was obtained, and an N-terminal flexibly disordered "tail." The globular domain contains three alpha-helices comprising the residues 144-154, 173-194, and 200-228 and a short anti-parallel beta-sheet comprising the residues 128-131 and 161-164. Within the globular domain, three polypeptide segments show increased structural disorder: i.e., a loop of residues 167-171, the residues 187-194 at the end of helix 2, and the residues 219-228 in the C-terminal part of helix 3. The local conformational state of the polypeptide segments 187-193 in helix 2 and 219-226 in helix 3 is measurably influenced by the length of the N-terminal tail, with the helical states being most highly populated in hPrP(23-230). When compared with the previously reported structures of the murine and Syrian hamster prion proteins, the length of helix 3 coincides more closely with that in the Syrian hamster protein whereas the disordered loop 167-171 is shared with murine PrP. These species variations of local structure are in a surface area of the cellular form of PrP that has previously been implicated in intermolecular interactions related both to the species barrier for infectious transmission of prion disease and to immune reactions.
5350955	The structure of a clostridial flavodoxin. I. Crystallographic characterization of the oxidized and semiquinone forms.	null
9546398	Crystal structure of the thermosome, the archaeal chaperonin and homolog of CCT.	We have determined to 2.6 A resolution the crystal structure of the thermosome, the archaeal group II chaperonin from T. acidophilum. The hexadecameric homolog of the eukaryotic chaperonin CCT/TRiC shows an (alphabeta)4(alphabeta)4 subunit assembly. Domain folds are homologous to GroEL but form a novel type of inter-ring contact. The domain arrangement resembles the GroEL-GroES cis-ring. Parts of the apical domains form a lid creating a closed conformation. The lid substitutes for a GroES-like cochaperonin that is absent in the CCT/TRiC system. The central cavity has a polar surface implicated in protein folding. Binding of the transition state analog Mg-ADP-AIF3 suggests that the closed conformation corresponds to the ATP form.
7473720	Proteolytic and conformational control of virus capsid maturation: the bacteriophage HK97 system.	Bacteriophage capsid assembly pathways provide excellent model systems to study large-scale conformational changes and other mechanisms that regulate the formation of macromolecular complexes. These capsids are formed from proheads: relatively fragile precursor particles which mature by undergoing extensive remodeling. Phage HK97 employs novel features in its strategy for building capsids, including assembly without a scaffolding protein, and the formation of a network of covalent cross-links between neighboring subunits in the mature virion. In addition, proteolytic cleavage of the capsid protein from 42 kDa to 31 kDa is essential for maturation. To investigate the structural bases for proteolysis and cross-linking, we have used cryo-electron micrographs to reconstruct the three-dimensional structures of purified particles from four discrete stages in the assembly pathway: Prohead I, Prohead II, Head I and Head II. Prohead I has icosahedral T = 7 packing of blister-shaped pentamers and hexamers. The pentamers are 5-fold symmetric, but the hexamers exhibit an unusual departure from 6-fold symmetry, as if two trimers had undergone a shear dislocation of about 25 A. Proteolytic conversion to Prohead II leaves the outer surface largely unchanged, but a major loss of density from the inner surface is observed, which we infer to represent the excision of the amino-terminal domains of the capsid protein. Upon expansion to the Head I state, the capsid becomes markedly larger, thinner walled, and more polyhedral: moreover, the capsomer shapes change radically; especially notable is the disappearance of the large hexon dislocation. No differences between Head I and the covalently cross-linked Head II could be observed at the current resolution of about 25 A, from which we infer that it is the conformational rearrangements effected by expansion that create the micro-environments needed for the autocatalytic formation of the isodipeptide bonds found in the mature virions ("pseudo-active sites").
9876114	Structural and functional analyses of benzamidine-based inhibitors in complex with trypsin: implications for the inhibition of factor Xa, tPA, and urokinase.	The trypsin-like serine proteinase superfamily contains a number of potential therapeutic targets, many of which are unsuitable for routine X-ray crystallographic studies. We have cocrystallized a selection of benzamidine-based inhibitors with bovine trypsin and solved their structures to a resolution of up to 1.7 A. Despite similar chemical formulas, the inhibitors exhibit a range of diverse binding modes that reflect their inhibitory spectra against the serine proteinases trypsin, thrombin, factor Xa, tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) and urokinase (uPA). In contrast to the compact folded conformations of thrombin inhibitors which allow optimal binding in the well-defined hydrophobic S2/S4 pocket of thrombin, those effective against factor Xa exhibit an extended conformation that allows occupation of the S3/S4 region, where hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions can stabilize the conformation. One group of inhibitors containing an N-terminal 2,4, 6-triisopropylphenylsulfonyl (TIPPS) moiety show little or no penetration into the S3/S4 subsites of trypsin. These latter sites are occluded in uPA, explaining why this class of compounds is effective against uPA. Despite presenting an extensive hydrophobic surface toward the solvent, the Ki values for TIPPS-containing compounds against trypsin is in the range 10(-7) to 10(-8) M. Comparison of the binding of a bis-benzamidine inhibitor in trypsin and tPA indicate that a shift in potency can be induced by relatively minor changes in binding mode. Implications for the inhibition of these proteinases are discussed.
8535235	Water molecules participate in proteinase-inhibitor interactions: crystal structures of Leu18, Ala18, and Gly18 variants of turkey ovomucoid inhibitor third domain complexed with Streptomyces griseus proteinase B.	Crystal structures of the complexes of Streptomyces griseus proteinase B (SGPB) with three P1 variants of turkey ovomucoid inhibitor third domain (OMTKY3), Leu18, Ala18, and Gly18, have been determined and refined to high resolution. Comparisons among these structures and of each with native, uncomplexed SGPB reveal that each complex features a unique solvent structure in the S1 binding pocket. The number and relative positions of water molecules bound in the S1 binding pocket vary according to the size of the side chain of the P1 residue. Water molecules in the S1 binding pocket of SGPB are redistributed in response to the complex formation, probably to optimize hydrogen bonds between the enzyme and the inhibitor. There are extensive water-mediated hydrogen bonds in the interfaces of the complexes. In all complexes, Asn 36 of OMTKY3 participates in forming hydrogen bonds, via water molecules, with residues lining the S1 binding pocket of SGPB. For a homologous series of aliphatic straight side chains, Gly18, Ala18, Abu18, Ape18, and Ahp18 variants, the binding free energy is a linear function of the hydrophobic surface area buried in the interface of the corresponding complexes. The resulting constant of proportionality is 34.1 cal mol-1 A-2. These structures confirm that the binding of OMTKY3 to the preformed S1 pocket in SGPB involves no substantial structural disturbances that commonly occur in the site-directed mutagenesis studies of interior residues in other proteins, thus providing one of the most reliable assessments of the contribution of the hydrophobic effect to protein-complex stability.
40828	Regulation of fatty acid synthesis.	Acetyl-CoA carboxylase and fatty acid synthetase are the two major enzymes involved in the synthesis of fatty acids in animals. The activities of both enzymes are affected by nutritional manipulations. Although acetyl-CoA carboxylase is considered generally to be the rate-limiting step in lipogenesis, there is evidence that suggests that fatty acid synthetase may become rate limiting under certain conditions. The principal support for the view that acetyl-CoA carboxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme for lipogenesis is that the activity of the enzyme is controlled by allosteric effectors that change the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme. Until recently, the only known control of fatty acid synthetase was through changes in rate of enzyme synthesis. Data are reviewed that show that fatty acid synthetase can exist in forms possessing different catalytic activities. Thus fatty acid synthetase appears to be subject to the type of control necessary for an enzyme to serve as a regulator of the rate of a biological process over a short term.
7435975	Lectin-carbohydrate interactions studied by a competitive enzyme inhibition assay.	null
12962504	Pronounced conversion of the metal-specific activity of superoxide dismutase from Porphyromonas gingivalis by the mutation of a single amino acid (Gly155Thr) located apart from the active site.	Glycine 155, which is located approximately 10 A from the active metal sites, is mostly conserved in aligned amino acid sequences of manganese-specific superoxide dismutases (Mn-SODs) and cambialistic SOD (showing the same activity with Fe and Mn) from Porphyromonas gingivalis, but is substituted for threonine in most Fe-SODs. Since Thr155 is located between Trp123 and Trp125, and Trp123 is one member of the metal-surrounding aromatic amino acids, there is a possibility that the conversion of this amino acid may cause a conversion of the metal-specific activity of cambialistic P. gingivalis SOD. To clarify this possibility, we have prepared a mutant of the P. gingivalis SOD with conversion of Gly155 to Thr. The ratios of the specific activities of Fe- to Mn-reconstituted enzyme, which are measured by the xanthine oxidase/cytochrome c method, increased from 0.6 in the wild-type to 11.2 in the mutant SODs, indicating the conversion of the metal-specific activity of the enzyme from a cambialistic type to an Fe-specific type. The visible absorption spectra of the Fe- and Mn-reconstituted mutant SODs closely resembled those of Fe-specific SOD. Furthermore, the EPR spectra of the Fe- and Mn-reconstituted mutant SODs also closely resembled those of Fe-specific SOD. Three-dimensional structures of the Fe-reconstituted wild-type SOD and Mn-reconstituted mutant SOD have been determined at 1.6 A resolution. Both structures have identical conformations, orientations of residues involved in metal binding, and hydrogen bond networks, while the side chain of Trp123 is moved further toward the metal-binding site than in wild-type SOD. A possible contribution of the structural differences to the conversion of the metal-specific activity through rearrangement of the hydrogen bond network among Trp123, Gln70, Tyr35, and the metal-coordinated solvent is discussed.
10603326	Crystal structure of an inhibitor complex of the 3C proteinase from hepatitis A virus (HAV) and implications for the polyprotein processing in HAV.	The proteolytic processing of the viral polyprotein is an essential step during the life cycle of hepatitis A virus (HAV), as it is in all positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses of animals. In HAV the 3C proteinase is the only proteolytic activity involved in the polyprotein processing. The specific recognition of the cleavage sites by the 3C proteinase depends on the amino acid sequence of the cleavage site. The structure of the complex of the HAV 3C proteinase and a dipeptide inhibitor has been determined by X-ray crystallography. The double-mutant of HAV 3C (C24S, F82A) was inhibited with the specific inhibitor iodoacetyl-valyl-phenylalanyl-amide. The resulting complex had an acetyl-Val-Phe-amide group covalently attached to the S(gamma) atom of the nucleophilic Cys 172 of the enzyme. Crystals of the complex of HAV 3C (C24S, F82A) acetyl-Val-Phe-amide were found to be monoclinic, space group P2(1), having 4 molecules in the asymmetric unit and diffracting to 1.9-A resolution. The final refined structure consists of 4 molecules of HAV 3C (C24S,F82A) acetyl-Val-Phe-amide, 1 molecule of DMSO, 1 molecule of glycerol, and 514 water molecules. There are considerable conformational differences among the four molecules in the asymmetric unit. The final R-factor is 20.4% for all observed reflections between 15.0- and 1.9-A resolution and the corresponding R(free) is 29.8%. The dipeptide inhibitor is bound to the S(1)(') and S(2)(') specificity subsites of the proteinase. The crystal structure reveals that the HAV 3C proteinase possesses a well-defined S(2)(') specificity pocket and suggests that the P(2)(') residue could be an important determinant for the selection of the primary cleavage site during the polyprotein processing in HAV.
9696852	The poliovirus empty capsid specifically recognizes the poliovirus receptor and undergoes some, but not all, of the transitions associated with cell entry.	Experimental results presented here demonstrate that the poliovirus empty capsid binds with saturable character to poliovirus-susceptible cells, binds preferentially to susceptible cells, and competes with mature virus for binding sites on cells. Hence, induced changes in the structure and/or stability of the particle by RNA encapsidation and virus maturation are not necessary for recognition by receptor. In mature virus, heat-induced rearrangements mimic those induced by receptor at physiological temperatures in several important respects, namely, expulsion of VP4 and externalization of the VP1 N-terminal arm. It is shown here that in the empty capsid the VP1 N-terminal arm is externalized but the VP4 portion of VP0 is not. Thus, these two hallmark rearrangements associated with cell entry can be uncoupled.
7638617	Crystal structure of a conserved protease that binds DNA: the bleomycin hydrolase, Gal6.	Bleomycin hydrolase is a cysteine protease that hydrolyzes the anticancer drug bleomycin. The homolog in yeast, Gal6, has recently been identified and found to bind DNA and to act as a repressor in the Gal4 regulatory system. The crystal structure of Gal6 at 2.2 A resolution reveals a hexameric structure with a prominent central channel. The papain-like active sites are situated within the central channel, in a manner resembling the organization of active sites in the proteasome. The Gal6 channel is lined with 60 lysine residues from the six subunits, suggesting a role in DNA binding. The carboxyl-terminal arm of Gal6 extends into the active site cleft and may serve a regulatory function. Rather than each residing in distinct, separable domains, the protease and DNA-binding activities appear structurally intertwined in the hexamer, implying a coupling of these two activities.
3549712	The structural basis for the interaction between L-tryptophan and the Escherichia coli trp aporepressor.	We have employed equilibrium dialysis to help study the mechanism by which the unliganded Escherichia coli trp aporepressor is activated by L-tryptophan to the liganded trp repressor. By measuring the relative affinity of L-tryptophan and various tryptophan analogues for the co-repressor's binding site, we have estimated the extent to which each of the functional groups of L-tryptophan contributes to the liganding process and discuss their role in the context of the crystal structures of the trp repressor and aporepressor. We have found that the indole ring and alpha carboxyl group of L-tryptophan are mainly responsible for its affinity to the aporepressor. The alpha amino group, however, has a small negative contribution to the affinity of L-tryptophan for the aporepressor which may be associated with its essential role in operator-specific binding.
8515812	Crystallographic analysis of the catalytic mechanism of haloalkane dehalogenase.	Crystal structures of haloalkane dehalogenase were determined in the presence of the substrate 1,2-dichloroethane. At pH 5 and 4 degrees C, substrate is bound in the active site without being converted; warming to room temperature causes the substrate's carbon-chlorine bond to be broken, producing a chloride ion with concomitant alkylation of the active-site residue Asp124. At pH 6 and room temperature the alkylated enzyme is hydrolysed by a water molecule activated by the His289-Asp260 pair in the active site. These results show that catalysis by the dehalogenase proceeds by a two-step mechanism involving an ester intermediate covalently bound at Asp124.
10913274	Role of amino acid residues at turns in the conformational stability and folding of human lysozyme.	To clarify the role of amino acid residues at turns in the conformational stability and folding of a globular protein, six mutant human lysozymes deleted or substituted at turn structures were investigated by calorimetry, GuHCl denaturation experiments, and X-ray crystal analysis. The thermodynamic properties of the mutant and wild-type human lysozymes were compared and discussed on the basis of their three-dimensional structures. For the deletion mutants, Delta47-48 and Delta101, the deleted residues are in turns on the surface and are absent in human alpha-lactalbumin, which is homologous to human lysozyme in amino acid sequence and tertiary structure. The stability of both mutants would be expected to increase due to a decrease in conformational entropy in the denatured state; however, both proteins were destabilized. The destabilizations were mainly caused by the disappearance of intramolecular hydrogen bonds. Each part deleted was recovered by the turn region like the alpha-lactalbumin structure, but there were differences in the main-chain conformation of the turn between each deletion mutant and alpha-lactalbumin even if the loop length was the same. For the point mutants, R50G, Q58G, H78G, and G37Q, the main-chain conformations of these substitution residues located in turns adopt a left-handed helical region in the wild-type structure. It is thought that the left-handed non-Gly residue has unfavorable conformational energy compared to the left-handed Gly residue. Q58G was stabilized, but the others had little effect on the stability. The structural analysis revealed that the turns could rearrange the main-chain conformation to accommodate the left-handed non-Gly residues. The present results indicate that turn structures are able to change their main-chain conformations, depending upon the side-chain features of amino acid residues on the turns. Furthermore, stopped-flow GuHCl denaturation experiments on the six mutants were performed. The effects of mutations on unfolding-refolding kinetics were significantly different among the mutant proteins. The deletion/substitutions in turns located in the alpha-domain of human lysozyme affected the refolding rate, indicating the contribution of turn structures to the folding of a globular protein.
7703848	Kinetics and crystal structure of a mutant Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase (Asp-369-->Asn): a mechanism involving one zinc per active site.	Using site-directed mutagenesis, an aspartate side chain involved in binding metal ions in the active site of Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase (Asp-369) was replaced, alternately, by asparagine (D369N) and by alanine (D369A). The purified mutant enzymes showed reduced turnover rates (kcat) and increased Michaelis constants (Km). The kcat for the D369A enzyme was 5,000-fold lower than the value for the wild-type enzyme. The D369N enzyme required Zn2+ in millimolar concentrations to become fully active; even under these conditions the kcat measured for hydrolysis of p-nitrophenol phosphate was 2 orders of magnitude lower than for the wild-type enzyme. Thus the kcat/Km ratios showed that catalysis is 50 times less efficient when the carboxylate side chain of Asp-369 is replaced by the corresponding amide; and activity is reduced to near nonenzymic levels when the carboxylate is replaced by a methyl group. The crystal structure of D369N, solved to 2.5 A resolution with an R-factor of 0.189, showed vacancies at 2 of the 3 metal binding sites. On the basis of the kinetic results and the refined X-ray coordinates, a reaction mechanism is proposed for phosphate ester hydrolysis by the D369N enzyme involving only 1 metal with the possible assistance of a histidine side chain.
7589423	Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of outer membrane phospholipase A from Escherichia coli.	The outer membrane phospholipase A (OMPLA) of Escherichia coli is one of the few integral outer membrane proteins displaying enzymatic activity. It is encoded as a mature protein of 269 amino acids preceded by a signal sequence of 20 amino acids. There is no sequence homology with water-soluble lipases and phospholipases. Crystals of the mature enzyme were obtained at 22 degrees C from 24-28% (v/v) 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol in Bis-Tris buffer, pH 5.9-6.0, with 1 mM calcium chloride and 1.5% (w/v) beta-octylglucoside. They have the symmetry of the trigonal spacegroup P3(1)21 (or P3(2)21) with cell dimensions of a = b = 79.6 A and c = 102.8 A (alpha = beta = 90 degrees, gamma = 120 degrees). Native crystals diffract to a resolution of 2.6 A.
8612277	The 1.85 A structure of vaccinia protein VP39: a bifunctional enzyme that participates in the modification of both mRNA ends.	VP39 is a bifunctional vaccinia virus protein that acts as both an mRNA cap-specific RNA 2'-O-methyltransferase and a poly(A) polymerase processivity factor. Here, we report the 1.85 A crystal structure of a VP39 variant complexed with its AdoMet cofactor. VP39 comprises a single core domain with structural similarity to the catalytic domains of other methyltransferases. Surface features and mutagenesis data suggest two possible RNA-binding sites with novel underlying architecture, one of which forms a cleft spanning the region adjacent to the methyltransferase active site. This report provides a prototypic structure for an RNA methyltransferase, a protein that interacts with the mRNA 5' cap, and an intact poxvirus protein.
11206074	Rationale for Bcl-xL/Bad peptide complex formation from structure, mutagenesis, and biophysical studies.	The three-dimensional structure of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL complexed to a 25-residue peptide from the death promoting region of Bad was determined using NMR spectroscopy. Although the overall structure is similar to Bcl-xL bound to a 16-residue peptide from the Bak protein (Sattler et al., 1997), the Bad peptide forms additional interactions with Bcl-xL. However, based upon site-directed mutagenesis experiments, these additional contacts do not account for the increased affinity of the Bad 25-mer for Bcl-xL compared to the Bad 16-mer. Rather, the increased helix propensity of the Bad 25-mer is primarily responsible for its greater affinity for Bcl-xL. Based on this observation, a pair of 16-residue peptides were designed and synthesized that were predicted to have a high helix propensity while maintaining the interactions important for complexation with Bcl-xL. Both peptides showed an increase in helix propensity compared to the wild-type and exhibited an enhanced affinity for Bcl-xL.
16443929	Solution Structure of a Post-transition State Analog of the Phosphotransfer Reaction between the A and B Cytoplasmic Domains of the Mannitol Transporter IIMannitol of the Escherichia coli Phosphotransferase System.	The solution structure of the post-transition state complex between the isolated cytoplasmic A (IIA(Mtl)) and phosphorylated B (phospho-IIB(Mtl)) domains of the mannitol transporter of the Escherichia coli phosphotransferase system has been solved by NMR. The active site His-554 of IIA(Mtl) was mutated to glutamine to block phosphoryl transfer activity, and the active site Cys-384 of IIB(Mtl) (residues of IIB(Mtl) are denoted in italic type) was substituted by serine to permit the formation of a stable phosphorylated form of IIB(Mtl). The two complementary interaction surfaces are predominantly hydrophobic, and two methionines on IIB(Mtl), Met-388 and Met-393, serve as anchors by interacting with two deep pockets on the surface of IIA(Mtl). With the exception of a salt bridge between the conserved Arg-538 of IIA(Mtl) and the phosphoryl group of phospho-IIB(Mtl), electrostatic interactions between the two proteins are limited to the outer edges of the interface, are few in number, and appear to be weak. This accounts for the low affinity of the complex (K(d) approximately 3.7 mm), which is optimally tuned to the intact biological system in which the A and B domains are expressed as a single polypeptide connected by a flexible 21-residue linker. The phosphoryl transition state can readily be modeled with no change in protein-protein orientation and minimal perturbations in both the backbone immediately adjacent to His-554 and Cys-384 and the side chains in close proximity to the phosphoryl group. Comparison with the previously solved structure of the IIA(Mtl)-HPr complex reveals how IIA(Mtl) uses the same interaction surface to recognize two structurally unrelated proteins and explains the much higher affinity of IIA(Mtl) for HPr than IIB(Mtl).
12003953	CcaR is an autoregulatory protein that binds to the ccaR and cefD-cmcI promoters of the cephamycin C-clavulanic acid cluster in Streptomyces clavuligerus.	The putative regulatory CcaR protein, which is encoded in the beta-lactam supercluster of Streptomyces clavuligerus, has been partially purified by ammonium sulfate precipitation and heparin affinity chromatography. In addition, it was expressed in Escherichia coli, purified as a His-tagged recombinant protein (rCcaR), and used to raise anti-rCcaR antibodies. The partially purified CcaR protein from S. clavuligerus was able to bind DNA fragments containing the promoter regions of the ccaR gene itself and the bidirectional cefD-cmcI promoter region. In contrast, CcaR did not bind to DNA fragments with the promoter regions of other genes of the cephamycin-clavulanic acid supercluster including lat, blp, claR, car-cyp, and the unlinked argR gene. The DNA shifts obtained with CcaR were prevented by anti-rCcaR immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies but not by anti-rabbit IgG antibodies. ccaR and the bidirectional cefD-cmcI promoter region were fused to the xylE reporter gene and expressed in Streptomyces lividans and S. clavuligerus. These constructs produced low catechol dioxygenase activity in the absence of CcaR; activity was increased 1.7- to 4.6-fold in cultures expressing CcaR. Amplification of the ccaR promoter region lacking its coding sequence in a high-copy-number plasmid in S. clavuligerus ATCC 27064 resulted in a reduced production of cephamycin C and clavulanic acid, by 12 to 20% and 40 to 60%, respectively, due to titration of the CcaR regulator. These findings confirm that CcaR is a positively acting autoregulatory protein able to bind to its own promoter as well as to the cefD-cmcI bidirectional promoter region.
8952503	Hydrogen bonding and solvent structure in an antigen-antibody interface. Crystal structures and thermodynamic characterization of three Fv mutants complexed with lysozyme.	Using site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystallography, and titration calorimetry, we have examined the structural and thermodynamic consequences of removing specific hydrogen bonds in an antigen-antibody interface. Crystal structures of three antibody FvD1.3 mutants, VLTyr50Ser (VLY50S), VHTyr32Ala (VHY32A), and VHTyr101Phe (VHY101F), bound to hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) have been determined at resolutions ranging from 1.85 to 2.10 A. In the wild-type (WT) FvD1.3-HEL complex, the hydroxyl groups of VLTyr50, VHTyr32, and VHTyr101 each form at least one hydrogen bond with the lysozyme antigen. Thermodynamic parameters for antibody-antigen association have been measured using isothermal titration calorimetry, giving equilibrium binding constants Kb (M-1) of 2.6 x 10(7) (VLY50S), 7.0 x 10(7) (VHY32A), and 4.0 x 10(6) (VHY101F). For the WT complex, Kb is 2.7 x 10(8) M-1; thus, the affinities of the mutant Fv fragments for HEL are 10-, 4-, and 70-fold lower than that of the original antibody, respectively. In all three cases entropy compensation results in an affinity loss that would otherwise be larger. Comparison of the three mutant crystal structures with the WT structure demonstrates that the removal of direct antigen-antibody hydrogen bonds results in minimal shifts in the positions of the remaining protein atoms. These observations show that this complex is considerably tolerant, both structurally and thermodynamically, to the truncation of antibody side chains that form hydrogen bonds with the antigen. Alterations in interface solvent structure for two of the mutant complexes (VLY50S and VHY32A) appear to compensate for the unfavorable enthalpy changes when protein-protein interactions are removed. These changes in solvent structure, along with the increased mobility of side chains near the mutation site, probably contribute to the observed entropy compensation. For the VHY101F complex, the nature of the large entropy compensation is not evident from a structural comparison of the WT and mutant complexes. Differences in the local structure and dynamics of the uncomplexed Fv molecules may account for the entropic discrepancy in this case.
12649487	Gating the selectivity filter in ClC chloride channels.	ClC channels conduct chloride (Cl-) ions across cell membranes and thereby govern the electrical activity of muscle cells and certain neurons, the transport of fluid and electrolytes across epithelia, and the acidification of intracellular vesicles. The structural basis of ClC channel gating was studied. Crystal structures of wild-type and mutant Escherichia coli ClC channels bound to a monoclonal Fab fragment reveal three Cl- binding sites within the 15-angstrom neck of an hourglass-shaped pore. The Cl- binding site nearest the extracellular solution can be occupied either by a Cl- ion or by a glutamate carboxyl group. Mutations of this glutamate residue in Torpedo ray ClC channels alter gating in electrophysiological assays. These findings reveal a form of gating in which the glutamate carboxyl group closes the pore by mimicking a Cl- ion.
11256612	Catalysis of serine oligopeptidases is controlled by a gating filter mechanism.	Proteases have a variety of strategies for selecting substrates in order to prevent uncontrolled protein degradation. A recent crystal structure determination of prolyl oligopeptidase has suggested a way for substrate selection involving an unclosed seven-bladed beta-propeller domain. We have engineered a disulfide bond between the first and seventh blades of the propeller, which resulted in the loss of enzymatic activity. These results provided direct evidence for a novel strategy of regulation in which oscillating propeller blades act as a gating filter during catalysis, letting small peptide substrates into the active site while excluding large proteins to prevent accidental proteolysis.
2143786	Maltodextrin-dependent crystallization of cyclomaltodextrin glucanotransferase from Bacillus circulans.	Crystals of cyclomaltodextrin glucanotransferase from Bacillus circulans (EC 2.4.1.19) suitable for high-resolution X-ray analysis were obtained by vapor diffusion against 60% (v/v) 2-methyl 2,4-pentanediol buffered with 100 mM-sodium Hepes, pH 7.55. The crystals have P2(1)2(1)2(1) space group symmetry, with a = 120.4 A, b = 110.9 A and c = 66.4 A, and contain one molecule of 68,000 in the asymmetric unit. Growth of single enzyme crystals was found to require the presence of either alpha-cyclodextrin, beta-cyclodextrin, gamma-cyclodextrin, or maltose in high molar excess, a requirement that could not be fulfilled by glucose, the basic building block of these compounds. Although the exact role of cyclic and linear maltodextrins in enzyme crystallization is not yet known, we have preliminary evidence that these compounds are degraded by the enzyme in the crystallization droplet.
9692955	Cryocrystallography and microspectrophotometry of a mutant (alpha D60N) tryptophan synthase alpha 2 beta 2 complex reveals allosteric roles of alpha Asp60.	We have investigated the role of Asp60 of the alpha-subunit in allosteric communication between the tryptophan synthase alpha- and beta-subunits. Crystallographic and microspectrophotometric studies have been carried out on a mutant (alpha D60N) tryptophan synthase alpha 2 beta 2 complex which has no observable alpha-activity, but has substantial beta-activity. Single-crystal polarized absorption spectra indicate that the external aldimine is the predominant L-serine intermediate and that the amount of the intermediate formed is independent of pH, monovalent cations, and allosteric effectors. The three-dimensional structure is reported for this mutant enzyme complexed with indole 3-propanol phosphate bound to the alpha-site and L-serine bound to the beta-site (alpha D60N-IPP-Ser), and this structure is compared with that of the unliganded mutant enzyme (alpha D60N). In the complex, L-serine forms a stable external aldimine with the pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme at the active site of the beta-subunit. The conformation of the unliganded mutant is almost identical to that of the wild type enzyme. However, the structure of the mutant complexed with IPP and serine exhibits ligand-induced conformational changes much smaller than those observed previously for another mutant enzyme in the presence of the same ligands (beta K87T-IPP-Ser) [Rhee, S., Parris, K. D., Hyde, C. C., Ahmed, S. A., Miles, E. W., and Davies, D. R. (1997) Biochemistry 36, 7664-7680]. The alpha D60N-IPP-Ser alpha 2 beta 2 complex does not undergo the following ligand-induced conformational changes: (1) the closure of the alpha-subunit loop 6 (residues 178-191), (2) the movement of the mobile subdomain (residues 93-189) of the beta-subunit, and (3) the rotation of the alpha-subunit relative to the beta-subunit. These observations show that alpha Asp60 plays important roles in the closure of loop 6 and in allosteric communication between the alpha- and beta-subunits.
7664122	Alternating arginine-modulated substrate specificity in an engineered tyrosine aminotransferase.	Mutation of six residues of Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase results in substantial acquisition of the transamination properties of tyrosine amino-transferase without loss of aspartate transaminase activity. X-ray crystallographic analysis of key inhibitor complexes of the hexamutant reveals the structural basis for this substrate selectivity. It appears that tyrosine aminotransferase achieves nearly equal affinities for a wide range of amino acids by an unusual conformational switch. An active-site arginine residue either shifts its position to electrostatically interact with charged substrates or moves aside to allow access of aromatic ligands.
8302837	Bound water molecules and conformational stabilization help mediate an antigen-antibody association.	We report the three-dimensional structures, at 1.8-A resolution, of the Fv fragment of the anti-hen egg white lysozyme antibody D1.3 in its free and antigen-bound forms. These structures reveal a role for solvent molecules in stabilizing the complex and provide a molecular basis for understanding the thermodynamic forces which drive the association reaction. Four water molecules are buried and others form a hydrogen-bonded network around the interface, bridging antigen and antibody. Comparison of the structures of free and bound Fv fragment of D1.3 reveals that several of the ordered water molecules in the free antibody combining site are retained and that additional water molecules link antigen and antibody upon complex formation. This solvation of the complex should weaken the hydrophobic effect, and the resulting large number of solvent-mediated hydrogen bonds, in conjunction with direct protein-protein interactions, should generate a significant enthalpic component. Furthermore, a stabilization of the relative mobilities of the antibody heavy- and light-chain variable domains and of that of the third complementarity-determining loop of the heavy chain seen in the complex should generate a negative entropic contribution opposing the enthalpic and the hydrophobic (solvent entropy) effects. This structural analysis is consistent with measurements of enthalpy and entropy changes by titration calorimetry, which show that enthalpy drives the antigen-antibody reaction. Thus, the main forces stabilizing the complex arise from antigen-antibody hydrogen bonding, van der Waals interactions, enthalpy of hydration, and conformational stabilization rather than solvent entropy (hydrophobic) effects.
9108091	Unique features in the structure of the complex between HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and the bis(heteroaryl)piperazine (BHAP) U-90152 explain resistance mutations for this nonnucleoside inhibitor.	The viral reverse transcriptase (RT) provides an attractive target in the search for anti-HIV therapies. The nonnucleoside inhibitors (NNIs) are a diverse set of compounds (usually HIV-1 specific) that function by distorting the polymerase active site upon binding in a nearby pocket. Despite being potent and of generally low toxicity, their clinical use has been limited by rapid selection for resistant viral populations. The 2.65-A resolution structure of the complex between HIV-1 RT and the bis(heteroaryl)piperazine (BHAP) NNI, 1-(5-methanesulfonamido-1H-indol-2-yl-carbonyl)-4- [3-(1-methyl-ethylamino) pyridinyl] piperazine (U-90152), reveals the inhibitor conformation and bound water molecules. The bulky U-90152 molecule occupies the same pocket as other NNIs, but the complex is stabilized quite differently, in particular by hydrogen bonding to the main chain of Lys-103 and extensive hydrophobic contacts with Pro-236. These interactions rationalize observed resistance mutations, notably Pro-236-Leu, which occurs characteristically for BHAPs. When bound, part of U-90152 protrudes into the solvent creating a channel between Pro-236 and the polypeptide segments 225-226 and 105-106, giving the first clear evidence of the entry mode for NNIs. The structure allows prediction of binding modes for related inhibitors [(altrylamino)piperidine-BHAPs] and suggests changes to U-90152, such as the addition of a 6 amino group to the pyridine ring, which may make binding more resilient to mutations in the RT. The observation of novel hydrogen bonding to the protein main chain may provide lessons for the improvement of quite different inhibitors.
11371167	Structure of a C-rich strand fragment of the human centromeric satellite III: a pH-dependent intercalation topology.	Repetitive DNA sequences may adopt unusual pairing arrangements. At acid to neutral pH, cytidine-rich DNA oligodeoxynucleotides can form the i-motif structure in which two parallel-stranded duplexes with C.C(+) pairs are intercalated head-to-tail. The i-motif may be formed by multimeric associations or by intra-molecular folding, depending on the number of cytidine tracts, the nucleotide sequences between them, and the experimental conditions.We have found that a natural fragment of the human centromeric satellite III, d(CCATTCCATTCCTTTCC), can form two monomeric i-motif structures that differ in their intercalation topology and that are favored at pH values higher (the eta-form) and lower (the lambda-form) than 4.6. The change in intercalation may be related to adenine protonation in the loops.We studied the uridine derivative methylated on the first cytidine base, d(5mCCATTCCAUTCCUTTCC), whose proton spectrum is better resolved. The intercalation topologies are (C7.C17)/(5mC1.C11)/(C6.C16)/(C2.C12) for form lambda and (5mC1.C11)/(C7.C17)/(C2.C12)/(C6.C16) for form eta. We have solved the structure of the eta-form, and we present a model for the lambda-form. The switch from eta to lambda involves disruption of the i-motif. In both forms, the central AUT linker crosses the wide groove, and the first and the third linkers loop across the minor grooves. The i-motif core is extended in the eta-form by the inter-loop reverse Watson-Crick A3.U13 pair, whose dissociation constant is around 10(-2) at 0 degrees C, and in the lambda-form by the interloop T5.T15 pair.In contrast, d(5mCCATTCCTTACCTTTCC) folds into a pH-independent structure that has the same intercalation topology as the lambda-form. The i-motif core is extended below by the interloop T5.T15 pair and closed on top by the T8.A10 pair.Thus, the C-rich strand of the human satellite III tandem repeats, like the G-rich strand, can fold into various compact structures. The relevance of these features to centromeric function remains unknown.
8989317	The RNA binding domain of ribosomal protein L11 is structurally similar to homeodomains.	The RNA binding domain of ribosomal protein L11 is strikingly similar to the homeodomain class of eukaryotic DNA binding proteins: it contains three alpha-helices that superimpose with homeodomain alpha-helices, and some conserved residues required for rRNA recognition align with homeodomain helix III residues contacting DNA bases.
12221102	Acyl-intermediate structures of the extended-spectrum class A beta-lactamase, Toho-1, in complex with cefotaxime, cephalothin, and benzylpenicillin.	Bacterial resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics is a serious problem limiting current clinical therapy. The most common form of resistance is the production of beta-lactamases that inactivate beta-lactam antibiotics. Toho-1 is an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase that has acquired efficient activity not only to penicillins but also to cephalosporins including the expanded-spectrum cephalosporins that were developed to be stable in former beta-lactamases. We present the acyl-intermediate structures of Toho-1 in complex with cefotaxime (expanded-spectrum cephalosporin), cephalothin (non-expanded-spectrum cephalosporin), and benzylpenicillin at 1.8-, 2.0-, and 2.1-A resolutions, respectively. These structures reveal distinct features that can explain the ability of Toho-1 to hydrolyze expanded-spectrum cephalosporins. First, the Omega-loop of Toho-1 is displaced to avoid the steric contacts with the bulky side chain of cefotaxime. Second, the conserved residues Asn(104) and Asp(240) form unique interactions with the bulky side chain of cefotaxime to fix it tightly. Finally, the unique interaction between the conserved Ser(237) and cephalosporins probably helps to bring the beta-lactam carbonyl group to the suitable position in the oxyanion hole, thus increasing the cephalosporinase activity.
14559893	Molecular basis for synergistic transcriptional activation by Oct1 and Sox2 revealed from the solution structure of the 42-kDa Oct1.Sox2.Hoxb1-DNA ternary transcription factor complex.	The Oct and Sox transcription factors control many different aspects of neural development and embryogenesis, often binding to adjacent sites on DNA, and interacting with one another through their DNA binding domains to regulate transcription synergistically. Oct proteins contain two DNA binding domains (POUS and POUHD) connected by a flexible linker, which interact with DNA in a bipartite manner. Residual dipolar coupling measurements on the binary Oct1.DNA complex reveal that the two domains are characterized by distinct alignment tensors in both phage pf1 and polyethylene glycol/hexanol liquid crystalline media. We show that this difference is due to a fast microscopic dissociation/association process involving alternative binding modes for the weaker binding POUS domain in the binary complex. Upon binding of Sox2 to an adjacent site in the Hoxb1 regulatory element, all components of the ternary Oct1.Sox2.DNA complex share a single alignment tensor. Thus ternary complex formation increases the site-specific affinity of Oct1 for DNA by effectively locking the POUS domain in a single orientation on the DNA. The solution NMR structure of the ternary 42 kDa Oct1.Sox2.Hoxb1-DNA complex, determined by novel procedures based on orientational restraints from dipolar couplings and conjoined rigid body/torsion angle dynamics, reveals that Sox2 and POUS interact through a predominantly hydrophobic interface, surrounded by a ring of electrostatic interactions. These observations suggest a mechanism of combinatorial control involving direct protein-protein interactions on the DNA whereby Oct1 in conjunction with a co-interacting transcription factor provide cell-specific transcription regulation.
11214325	The bacterial conjugation protein TrwB resembles ring helicases and F1-ATPase.	The transfer of DNA across membranes and between cells is a central biological process; however, its molecular mechanism remains unknown. In prokaryotes, trans-membrane passage by bacterial conjugation, is the main route for horizontal gene transfer. It is the means for rapid acquisition of new genetic information, including antibiotic resistance by pathogens. Trans-kingdom gene transfer from bacteria to plants or fungi and even bacterial sporulation are special cases of conjugation. An integral membrane DNA-binding protein, called TrwB in the Escherichia coli R388 conjugative system, is essential for the conjugation process. This large multimeric protein is responsible for recruiting the relaxosome DNA-protein complex, and participates in the transfer of a single DNA strand during cell mating. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of a soluble variant of TrwB. The molecule consists of two domains: a nucleotide-binding domain of alpha/beta topology, reminiscent of RecA and DNA ring helicases, and an all-alpha domain. Six equivalent protein monomers associate to form an almost spherical quaternary structure that is strikingly similar to F1-ATPase. A central channel, 20 A in width, traverses the hexamer.
8594346	Crystallization of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase with and without nucleic acid substrates, inhibitors, and an antibody Fab fragment.	null
15697221	Understanding GFP chromophore biosynthesis: controlling backbone cyclization and modifying post-translational chemistry.	The Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein (GFP) undergoes a remarkable post-translational modification to create a chromophore out of its component amino acids S65, Y66, and G67. Here, we describe mutational experiments in GFP designed to convert this chromophore into a 4-methylidene-imidazole-5-one (MIO) moiety similar to the post-translational active-site electrophile of histidine ammonia lyase (HAL). Crystallographic structures of GFP variant S65A Y66S (GFPhal) and of four additional related site-directed mutants reveal an aromatic MIO moiety and mechanistic details of GFP chromophore formation and MIO biosynthesis. Specifically, the GFP scaffold promotes backbone cyclization by (1) favoring nucleophilic attack by close proximity alignment of the G67 amide lone pair with the pi orbital of the residue 65 carbonyl and (2) removing enthalpic barriers by eliminating inhibitory main-chain hydrogen bonds in the precursor state. GFP R96 appears to induce structural rearrangements important in aligning the molecular orbitals for ring cyclization, favor G67 nitrogen deprotonation through electrostatic interactions with the Y66 carbonyl, and stabilize the reduced enolate intermediate. Our structures and analysis also highlight negative design features of the wild-type GFP architecture, which favor chromophore formation by destabilizing alternative conformations of the chromophore tripeptide. By providing a molecular basis for understanding and controlling the driving force and protein chemistry of chromophore creation, this research has implications for expansion of the genetic code through engineering of modified amino acids.
1313294	Expression and characterization of recombinant hepatitis A virus 3C proteinase.	The 3C proteinase from the hepatitis A virus (HAV) was cloned into a multicopy expression vector in Escherichia coli under control of the tac promoter. The resulting plasmid construction produced 3C proteinase as a soluble and active enzyme constituting approximately 10% of total cellular proteins. The enzyme was purified to apparent homogeneity as judged by SDS gel electrophoresis and HPLC reversed-phase and FPLC ion-exchange chromatography. A colorimetric assay was developed, and synthetic peptides derived from the predicted cleavage sites of the HAV polyprotein were tested for proteolysis of the enzyme. The peptide representing the 2B/2C cleavage site was cleaved most efficiently with a Km and kcat of 2.1 +/- 0.5 mM and 1.8 +/- 0.1 s-1, respectively. Site-directed mutagenesis was then used to identify the cysteine at position 172 as the active site nucleophile. Finally, the purified enzyme showed the expected endoproteinase activity on the P1 precursor protein generated by in vitro transcription/translation.
9159481	Comparison of the three-dimensional structures of recombinant human H and horse L ferritins at high resolution.	Mammalian ferritins are 24-mers assembled from two types of polypeptide chain which provide the molecule with different functions. H(eavy) chains catalyse the first step in iron storage, the oxidation of iron(II). L(ight) chains promote the nucleation of the mineral ferrihydrite enabling storage of iron(III) inside the protein shell. We report here the comparison of the three-dimensional structures of recombinant human H chain (HuHF) and horse L chain (HoLF) ferritin homopolymers, which have been refined at 1.9 A resolution. There is 53% sequence identity between these molecules, and the two structures are very similar, the H and L subunit alpha-carbons superposing to within 0.5 A rms deviation with 41 water molecules in common. Nevertheless, there are significant important differences which can be related to differences in function. In particular, the centres of the four-helix bundles contain distinctive groups of hydrophilic residues which have been associated with ferroxidase activity in H chains and enhanced stability in L chains. L chains contain a group of glutamates associated with mineralisation within the iron storage cavity of the protein.
16411772	Kinetic and crystallographic analysis of mutant Escherichia coli aminopeptidase P: insights into substrate recognition and the mechanism of catalysis.	Aminopeptidase P (APPro) is a manganese-dependent enzyme that cleaves the N-terminal amino acid from polypeptides where the second residue is proline. APPro shares a similar fold, substrate specificity, and catalytic mechanism with methionine aminopeptidase and prolidase. To investigate the roles of conserved residues at the active site, seven mutant forms of APPro were characterized kinetically and structurally. Mutation of individual metal ligands selectively abolished binding of either or both Mn(II) atoms at the active site, and none of these metal-ligand mutants had detectable catalytic activity. Mutation of the conserved active site residues His243 and His361 revealed that both are required for catalysis. We propose that His243 stabilizes substrate binding through an interaction with the carbonyl oxygen of the requisite proline residue of a substrate and that His361 stabilizes substrate binding and the gem-diol catalytic intermediate. Sequence, structural, and kinetic analyses reveal that His350, conserved in APPro and prolidase but not in methionine aminopeptidase, forms part of a hydrophobic binding pocket that gives APPro its proline specificity. Further, peptides in which the required proline residue is replaced by N-methylalanine or alanine are cleaved by APPro, but they are extremely poor substrates due to a loss of interactions between the prolidyl ring of the substrate and the hydrophobic proline-binding pocket.
15794647	Ligand migration and protein fluctuations in myoglobin mutant L29W.	We have determined eight X-ray structures of myoglobin mutant L29W at various experimental conditions. In addition, infrared spectroscopic experiments are presented, which are discussed in the light of the X-ray structures. Two distinct conformations of the CO-ligated protein were identified, giving rise to two stretching bands of heme-bound CO. If L29W MbCO crystals are illuminated around 180 K, a deoxy species is formed. The CO molecules migrate to the proximal side of the heme and remain trapped in the so-called Xe1 cavity upon temperature decrease to 105 K. The structure of this photoproduct is almost identical to the equilibrium high-temperature deoxy Mb structure. If the temperature is cycled to increasingly higher values, CO recombination is observed. Three intermediate structures have been determined during the rebinding process. Efficient recombination occurs only above 180 K, the characteristic temperature for the onset of protein dynamics. Rebinding is remarkably slow because bulky residues His64 and Trp29 block important migration pathways of the CO molecule.
7867072	Crystal structure of the replication terminator protein from B. subtilis at 2.6 A.	The crystal structure of the replication terminator protein (RTP) of B. subtilis has been determined at 2.6 A resolution. As previously suggested by both biochemical and biophysical studies, the molecule exists as a symmetric dimer and is in the alpha + beta protein-folding class. The protein has several uncommon features, including an antiparallel coiled-coil, which serves as the dimerization domain, and both an alpha-helix and a beta-ribbon suitably positioned to interact with the major and minor grooves of B-DNA. A site has been identified on the surface of RTP that is biochemically and positionally suitable for interaction with the replication-specific helicase. Other features of the structure are consistent with the polar contrahelicase mechanism of the protein. A model of the interaction between RTP and its cognate DNA is presented.
9541387	Crystal structures of the psychrophilic alpha-amylase from Alteromonas haloplanctis in its native form and complexed with an inhibitor.	Alteromonas haloplanctis is a bacterium that flourishes in Antarctic sea-water and it is considered as an extreme psychrophile. We have determined the crystal structures of the alpha-amylase (AHA) secreted by this bacterium, in its native state to 2.0 angstroms resolution as well as in complex with Tris to 1.85 angstroms resolution. The structure of AHA, which is the first experimentally determined three-dimensional structure of a psychrophilic enzyme, resembles those of other known alpha-amylases of various origins with a surprisingly greatest similarity to mammalian alpha-amylases. AHA contains a chloride ion which activates the hydrolytic cleavage of substrate alpha-1,4-glycosidic bonds. The chloride binding site is situated approximately 5 angstroms from the active site which is characterized by a triad of acid residues (Asp 174, Glu 200, Asp 264). These are all involved in firm binding of the Tris moiety. A reaction mechanism for substrate hydrolysis is proposed on the basis of the Tris inhibitor binding and the chloride activation. A trio of residues (Ser 303, His 337, Glu 19) having a striking spatial resemblance with serine-protease like catalytic triads was found approximately 22 angstroms from the active site. We found that this triad is equally present in other chloride dependent alpha-amylases, and suggest that it could be responsible for autoproteolytic events observed in solution for this cold adapted alpha-amylase.
15449941	Engineering of the pH optimum of Bacillus cereus beta-amylase: conversion of the pH optimum from a bacterial type to a higher-plant type.	The optimum pH of Bacillus cereus beta-amylase (BCB, pH 6.7) differs from that of soybean beta-amylase (SBA, pH 5.4) due to the substitution of a few amino acid residues near the catalytic base residue (Glu 380 in SBA and Glu 367 in BCB). To explore the mechanism for controlling the optimum pH of beta-amylase, five mutants of BCB (Y164E, Y164F, Y164H, Y164Q, and Y164Q/T47M/Y164E/T328N) were constructed and characterized with respect to enzymatic properties and X-ray structural crystal analysis. The optimum pH of the four single mutants shifted to 4.2-4.8, approximately 2 pH units and approximately 1 pH unit lower than those of BCB and SBA, respectively, and their k(cat) values decreased to 41-3% of that of the wild-type enzyme. The X-ray crystal analysis of the enzyme-maltose complexes showed that Glu 367 of the wild type is surrounded by two water molecules (W1 and W2) that are not found in SBA. W1 is hydrogen-bonded to both side chains of Glu 367 and Tyr 164. The mutation of Tyr 164 to Glu and Phe resulted in the disruption of the hydrogen bond between Tyr 164 Oeta and W1 and the introduction of two additional water molecules near position 164. In contrast, the triple mutant of BCB with a slightly decreased pH optimum at pH 6.0 has no water molecules (W1 and W2) around Glu 367. These results suggested that a water-mediated hydrogen bond network (Glu 367...W1...Tyr 164...Thr 328) is the primary requisite for the increased pH optimum of wild-type BCB. This strategy is completely different from that of SBA, in which a hydrogen bond network (Glu 380...Thr 340...Glu 178) reduces the optimum pH in a hydrophobic environment.
2067578	Convergent evolution of similar function in two structurally divergent enzymes.	An example of two related enzymes that catalyse similar reactions but possess different active sites is provided by comparing the structure of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase with glutathione reductase. Both are dimeric enzymes that catalyse the reduction of disulphides by pyridine nucleotides through an enzyme disulphide and a flavin. Human glutathione reductase contains four structural domains within each molecule: the flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD)- and nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-binding domains, the 'central' domain and the C-terminal domain that provides the dimer interface and part of the active site. Although both enzymes share the same catalytic mechanism and similar tertiary structures, their active sites do not resemble each other. We have determined the crystal structure of E. coli thioredoxin reductase at 2 A resolution, and show that thioredoxin reductase lacks the domain that provides the dimer interface in glutathione reductase, and forms a completely different dimeric structure. The catalytically active disulphides are located in different domains on opposite sides of the flavin ring system. This suggests that these enzymes diverged from an ancestral nucleotide-binding protein and acquired their disulphide reductase activities independently.
8805557	Crystal structures of reduced, oxidized, and mutated human thioredoxins: evidence for a regulatory homodimer.	BACKGROUND: Human thioredoxin reduces the disulfide bonds of numerous proteins in vitro, and can activate transcription factors such as NFkB in vivo. Thioredoxin can also act as a growth factor, and is overexpressed and secreted in certain tumor cells. RESULTS: Crystal structures were determined for reduced and oxidized wild type human thioredoxin (at 1.7 and 2.1 A nominal resolution, respectively), and for reduced mutant proteins Cys73-->Ser and Cys32-->Ser/Cys35-->Ser (at 1.65 and 1.8 A, respectively). Surprisingly, thioredoxin is dimeric in all four structures; the dimer is linked through a disulfide bond between Cys73 of each monomer, except in Cys73-->Ser where a hydrogen bond occurs. The thioredoxin active site is blocked by dimer formation. Conformational changes in the active site and dimer interface accompany oxidation of the active-site cysteines, Cys32 and Cys35. CONCLUSIONS: It has been suggested that a reduced pKa in the first cysteine (Cys32 in human thioredoxin) of the active-site sequence is important for modulation of the redox potential in thioredoxin. A hydrogen bond between the sulfhydryls of Cys32 and Cys35 may reduce the pKa of Cys32 and this pKa depression probably results in increased nucleophilicity of the Cys32 thiolate group. This nucleophilicity, in tum, is thought to be necessary for the role of thioredoxin in disulfide-bond reduction. The physiological role, if any, of thioredoxin dimer formation remains unknown. It is possible that dimerization may provide a mechanism for regulation of the protein, or a means of sensing oxidative stress.
15994304	X-ray snapshots of peptide processing in mutants of tricorn-interacting factor F1 from Thermoplasma acidophilum.	The tricorn-interacting factor F1 of the archaeon Thermoplasma acidophilum cleaves small hydrophobic peptide products of the proteasome and tricorn protease. F1 mutants of the active site residues that are involved in substrate recognition and catalysis displayed distinct activity patterns toward fluorogenic test substrates. Crystal structures of the mutant proteins complexed with peptides Phe-Leu, Pro-Pro, or Pro-Leu-Gly-Gly showed interaction of glutamates 213 and 245 with the N termini of the peptides and defined the S1 and S1' sites and the role of the catalytic residues. Evidence was found for processive peptide cleavage in the N-to-C direction, whereby the P1' product is translocated into the S1 site. A functional interaction of F1 with the tricorn protease was observed with the inactive F1 mutant G37A. Moreover, small angle x-ray scattering measurements for tricorn and inhibited F1 have been interpreted as formation of transient and substrate-induced complexes.
3656429	Refined structure of glutathione reductase at 1.54 A resolution.	The crystal structure of human glutathione reductase has been established at 1.54 A resolution using a restrained least-squares refinement method. Based on 77,690 independent reflections of better than 10 A resolution, a final R-factor of 18.6% was obtained with a model obeying standard geometry within 0.025 A in bond lengths and 2.4 degrees in bond angles. The final 2Fo-Fc electron density map allows for the distinction of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen atoms with temperature factors below about 25 A2. Apart from 461 amino acid residues and the prosthetic group FAD, the model contains 524 solvent molecules, about 118 of which can be considered an integral part of the enzyme. The largest solvent cluster is at the dimer interface and contains 104 interconnected solvent molecules, part of which are organized in a warped sheet-like structure. The main-chain dihedral angles are well-concentrated in the allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot. The spread of dihedral angles in beta-pleated sheets is much larger than in alpha-helices and especially in alpha-helix cores, indicating the higher plasticity of beta-structures. The analysis revealed a large amount of 3(10)-helix. The side-chain conformations cluster at the staggered positions, and show well-defined preferences. Also, a mobility gradient is observed for side-chains. Non-polar and polar side-chains show average temperature factor increases per bond of 10% and 25%, respectively. A number of alternative conformations of internal side-chains, in particular serines and methionines, have been detected. The extended FAD molecule also shows a mobility gradient between the very rigid flavin (mean value of B) = 8.7 A2) and the more mobile adenine (mean value of B = 16.2 A2). The entire active center is particularly well ordered, with temperature factors around 10 A2. The dimer interface consists of a rigid contact area, which is well conserved in the Escherichia coli enzyme, and a flexible area that is not. Altogether, the buried surfaces at the crystal contacts are half as large as at the dimer interface, but less specific. The refined structure shows clearly that there are no buried cations compensating the charge of the pyrophosphate moiety of FAD. The flavin deviates slightly from standard geometry, which is possibly caused by the polypeptide environment. In contrast to an earlier interpretation, atom N5 of the flavin can accommodate a proton, and it is conceivable that this proton proceeds to the redox-active disulfide.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
1553543	Response of a protein structure to cavity-creating mutations and its relation to the hydrophobic effect.	Six "cavity-creating" mutants, Leu46----Ala (L46A), L99A, L118A, L121A, L133A, and Phe153----Ala (F153A), were constructed within the hydrophobic core of phage T4 lysozyme. The substitutions decreased the stability of the protein at pH 3.0 by different amounts, ranging from 2.7 kilocalories per mole (kcal mol-1) for L46A and L121A to 5.0 kcal mol-1 for L99A. The double mutant L99A/F153A was also constructed and decreased in stability by 8.3 kcal mol-1. The x-ray structures of all of the variants were determined at high resolution. In every case, removal of the wild-type side chain allowed some of the surrounding atoms to move toward the vacated space but a cavity always remained, which ranged in volume from 24 cubic angstroms (A3) for L46A to 150 A3 for L99A. No solvent molecules were observed in any of these cavities. The destabilization of the mutant Leu----Ala proteins relative to wild type can be approximated by a constant term (approximately 2.0 kcal mol-1) plus a term that increases in proportion to the size of the cavity. The constant term is approximately equal to the transfer free energy of leucine relative to alanine as determined from partitioning between aqueous and organic solvents. The energy term that increases with the size of the cavity can be expressed either in terms of the cavity volume (24 to 33 cal mol-1 A-3) or in terms of the cavity surface area (20 cal mol-1 A-2). The results suggest how to reconcile a number of conflicting reports concerning the strength of the hydrophobic effect in proteins.
8009227	Structure of the RGD protein decorsin: conserved motif and distinct function in leech proteins that affect blood clotting.	The structure of the leech protein decorsin, a potent 39-residue antagonist of glycoprotein IIb-IIIa and inhibitor of platelet aggregation, was determined by nuclear magnetic resonance. In contrast to other disintegrins, the Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD)-containing region of decorsin is well defined. The three-dimensional structure of decorsin is similar to that of hirudin, an anticoagulant leech protein that potently inhibits thrombin. Amino acid sequence comparisons suggest that ornatin, another glycoprotein IIb-IIIa antagonist, and antistasin, a potent Factor Xa inhibitor and anticoagulant found in leeches, share the same structural motif. Although decorsin, hirudin, and antistasin all affect the blood clotting process and appear similar in structure, their mechanisms of action and epitopes important for binding to their respective targets are distinct.
1594573	Site-directed mutagenesis of pseudoazurin from Alcaligenes faecalis S-6; Pro80Ala mutant exhibits marked increase in reduction potential.	Pseudoazurin (a blue copper protein or cupredoxin) of a denitrifying bacterium Alcaligenes faecalis S-6 is a direct electron carrier for a Cu-containing nitrite reductase (NIR) of the same organism. Site-directed mutagenesis of the pseudoazurin was carried out using an Escherichia coli expression system. Replacement of Tyr74 by Phe to remove an internal hydrogen bond in the beta-barrel caused a slight decrease in heat stability as well as a requirement for a higher concentration of Cu2+ for production in the E. coli host. Exchange of Ala for Pro80 adjacent to His81, one of the four ligands binding a type I Cu atom, caused a marked increase in reduction potential by 139 mV without change in the optical absorption spectrum. The ability of the pseudoazurin to transfer electrons to NIR was markedly diminished but the apparent Km of NIR for pseudoazurin was not affected by the mutation. X-ray diffraction data collected on the oxidized and reduced forms of the Pro80Ala mutant show that a water molecule occupies the pocket created by the absent side chain. This observation suggests that the increase in reduction potential may be caused due to the increased solvent accessibility to the Cu atom. The electron density difference maps on these structures (at 2.0 A) show that this water moves during the change in oxidation state, and that there are small, but localized, conformational changes greater than 6.5 A from the copper site, as well as movement of both the Cu2+ and the cysteinate sulfur.
15196010	A molecular ruler for chain elongation catalyzed by octaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase and its structure-based engineering to produce unprecedented long chain trans-prenyl products.	Octaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase (OPPs) catalyzes consecutive condensation reactions of farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) with five molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) to generate C(40) octaprenyl pyrophosphate (OPP) which constitutes the side chain of menaquinone. We have previously reported the X-ray structure of OPPs from Thermotoga maritima, which is composed entirely of alpha-helices joined by connecting loops and is arranged with nine core helices around a large central cavity [Guo, R. T., Kuo, C. J., Ko, T. P., Chou, C. C., Shr, R. L., Liang, P. H., and Wang, A. H.-J. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 4903-4912]. A76 and S77 are located on top of the active site close to where FPP is bound. A76Y and A76Y/S77F OPPs mutants produce C(20), indicating that the substituted larger residues interfere with the substrate chain elongation. Surprisingly, the A76Y/S77F mutant synthesizes a larger amount of C(20) than the A76Y mutant. In the crystal structure of the A76Y/S77F mutant, F77 is pushed away by Y76, thereby creating more space between those two large amino acids to accommodate the C(20) product. A large F132 residue at the bottom of the tunnel-shaped active site serves as the "floor" and determines the final product chain length. The substitution of F132 with a small Ala, thereby removing the blockade, led to the synthesis of a C(50) product larger than that produced by the wild-type enzyme. On the basis of the structure, we have sequentially mutated the large amino acids, including F132, L128, I123, and D62, to Ala underneath the tunnel. The products of the F132A/L128A/I123A/D62A mutant reach C(95), beyond the largest chain length generated by all known trans-prenyltransferases. Further modifications of the enzyme reaction conditions, including new IPP derivatives, may allow the preparation of high-molecular weight polyprenyl products resembling the rubber molecule.
15667208	Disulfide bond mutagenesis and the structure and function of the head-to-tail macrocyclic trypsin inhibitor SFTI-1.	SFTI-1 is a novel 14 amino acid peptide comprised of a circular backbone constrained by three proline residues, a hydrogen-bond network, and a single disulfide bond. It is the smallest and most potent known Bowman-Birk trypsin inhibitor and the only one with a cyclic peptidic backbone. The solution structure of [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1, a disulfide-deficient analogue of SFTI-1, has been determined by (1)H NMR spectroscopy. The lowest energy structures of native SFTI-1 and [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1 are similar and superimpose with a root-mean-square deviation over the backbone and heavy atoms of 0.26 +/- 0.09 and 1.10 +/- 0.22 A, respectively. The disulfide bridge in SFTI-1 was found to be a minor determinant for the overall structure, but its removal resulted in a slightly weakened hydrogen-bonding network. To further investigate the role of the disulfide bridge, NMR chemical shifts for the backbone H(alpha) protons of two disulfide-deficient linear analogues of SFTI-1, [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1[6,5] and [ABA(3,11)]SFTI-1[1,14] were measured. These correspond to analogues of the cleavage product of SFTI-1 and a putative biosynthetic precursor, respectively. In contrast with the cyclic peptide, it was found that the disulfide bridge is essential for maintaining the structure of these open-chain analogues. Overall, the hydrogen-bond network appears to be a crucial determinant of the structure of SFTI-1 analogues.
3112942	The three-dimensional structure of Asn102 mutant of trypsin: role of Asp102 in serine protease catalysis.	The structure of the Asn102 mutant of trypsin was determined in order to distinguish whether the reduced activity of the mutant at neutral pH results from an altered active site conformation or from an inability to stabilize a positive charge on the active site histidine. The active site structure of the Asn102 mutant of trypsin is identical to the native enzyme with respect to the specificity pocket, the oxyanion hole, and the orientation of the nucleophilic serine. The observed decrease in rate results from the loss of nucleophilicity of the active site serine. This decreased nucleophilicity may result from stabilization of a His57 tautomer that is unable to accept the serine hydroxyl proton.
15723541	Kinetic and crystallographic analysis of active site mutants of Escherichia coli gamma-aminobutyrate aminotransferase.	The E. coli isozyme of gamma-aminobutyrate aminotransferase (GABA-AT) is a tetrameric pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme that catalyzes transamination between primary amines and alpha-keto acids. The roles of the active site residues V241, E211, and I50 in the GABA-AT mechanism have been probed by site-directed mutagenesis. The beta-branched side chain of V241 facilitates formation of external aldimine intermediates with primary amine substrates, while E211 provides charge compensation of R398 selectively in the primary amine half-reaction and I50 forms a hydrophobic lid at the top of the substrate binding site. The structures of the I50Q, V241A, and E211S mutants were solved by X-ray crystallography to resolutions of 2.1, 2.5, and 2.52 A, respectively. The structure of GABA-AT is similar in overall fold and active site structure to that of dialkylglycine decarboxylase, which catalyzes both transamination and decarboxylation half-reactions in its normal catalytic cycle. Therefore, an attempt was made to convert GABA-AT into a decarboxylation-dependent aminotransferase similar to dialkylglycine decarboxylase by systematic mutation of E. coli GABA-AT active site residues. Two of the twelve mutants presented, E211S/I50G/C77K and E211S/I50H/V80D, have approximately 10-fold higher decarboxylation activities than the wild-type enzyme, and the E211S/I50H/V80D has formally changed the reaction specificity to that of a decarboxylase.
12549906	Structural and biochemical studies of inhibitor binding to human cytomegalovirus protease.	Herpesvirus protease is required for the life cycle of the virus and is an attractive target for the design and development of new anti-herpes agents. The protease belongs to a new class of serine proteases, with a novel backbone fold and a unique Ser-His-His catalytic triad. Here we report the crystal structures of human cytomegalovirus protease in complex with two peptidomimetic inhibitors. The structures reveal a new hydrogen-bonding interaction between the main chain carbonyl of the P(5) residue and the main chain amide of amino acid 137 of the protease, which is important for the binding affinity of the inhibitor. Conformational flexibility was observed in the S(3) pocket of the enzyme, and this is supported by our characterization of several mutants in this pocket. One of the structures is at 2.5 A resolution, allowing us for the first time to locate ordered solvent molecules in the inhibitor complex. The presence of two solvent molecules in the active site may have implications for the design of new inhibitors against this enzyme. Favorable and stereospecific interactions have been established in the S(1)' pocket for one of these inhibitors.
8918534	Structural analysis of a mutation in canine parvovirus which controls antigenicity and host range.	A single mutation in canine parvovirus (CPV) of VP2 residue 300 from alanine to aspartic acid causes a loss of canine host range and alters the antigenic properties of the virus. The three-dimensional structure of this mutant has been solved to 3.25 A resolution. Crystals of full particles were triclinic, with cell dimensions of a = 267.6, b = 268.5, c = 274.3 A. alpha = 61.9, beta = 62.6, and gamma = 60.2 degrees. The native structure of CPV was used as an initial model. Phases were improved by real-space electron density averaging. In spite of the relative low percentage of observed reflections (32.5% of the data between 15.0 and 3.25 A resolution), the presence of 60-fold noncrystallographic redundancy allowed the averaging procedure to converge smoothly. The mutant aspartic acid at residue 300 forms a salt bridge with Arg81 in an icosahedrally threefold-related subunit, inducing local changes within the antigenic site B on the CPV surface. In addition, the loop between residues 359 and 374 adopts a conformation similar to that displayed by feline panleukopenia virus. The ability of the Ala300-->Asp mutant to evade antibody binding can be associated with the change of charge distribution and structure in the antigenic binding site. The variation in host range behavior may be due to the increased stability as a result of formation of the salt bridge between adjacent subunits.
11301006	Structural basis of the redox switch in the OxyR transcription factor.	The Escherichia coli OxyR transcription factor senses H2O2 and is activated through the formation of an intramolecular disulfide bond. Here we present the crystal structures of the regulatory domain of OxyR in its reduced and oxidized forms, determined at 2.7 A and 2.3 A resolutions, respectively. In the reduced form, the two redox-active cysteines are separated by approximately 17 A. Disulfide bond formation in the oxidized form results in a significant structural change in the regulatory domain. The structural remodeling, which leads to different oligomeric associations, accounts for the redox-dependent switch in OxyR and provides a novel example of protein regulation by "fold editing" through a reversible disulfide bond formation within a folded domain.
15931226	Structural characterization of the molecular platform for type III secretion system assembly.	Type III secretion systems (TTSSs) are multi-protein macromolecular 'machines' that have a central function in the virulence of many Gram-negative pathogens by directly mediating the secretion and translocation of bacterial proteins (termed effectors) into the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. Most of the 20 unique structural components constituting this secretion apparatus are highly conserved among animal and plant pathogens and are also evolutionarily related to proteins in the flagellar-specific export system. Recent electron microscopy experiments have revealed the gross 'needle-shaped' morphology of the TTSS, yet a detailed understanding of the structural characteristics and organization of these protein components within the bacterial membranes is lacking. Here we report the 1.8-A crystal structure of EscJ from enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC), a member of the YscJ/PrgK family whose oligomerization represents one of the earliest events in TTSS assembly. Crystal packing analysis and molecular modelling indicate that EscJ could form a large 24-subunit 'ring' superstructure with extensive grooves, ridges and electrostatic features. Electron microscopy, labelling and mass spectrometry studies on the orthologous Salmonella typhimurium PrgK within the context of the assembled TTSS support the stoichiometry, membrane association and surface accessibility of the modelled ring. We propose that the YscJ/PrgK protein family functions as an essential molecular platform for TTSS assembly.
16220560	On the importance of carbohydrate-aromatic interactions for the molecular recognition of oligosaccharides by proteins: NMR studies of the structure and binding affinity of AcAMP2-like peptides with non-natural naphthyl and fluoroaromatic residues.	The specific interaction of a variety of modified hevein domains to chitooligosaccharides has been studied by NMR spectroscopy in order to assess the importance of aromatic-carbohydrate interactions for the molecular recognition of neutral sugars. These mutant AcAMP2-like peptides, which have 4-fluoro-phenylalanine, tryptophan, or 2-naphthylalanine at the key interacting positions, have been prepared by solid-phase synthesis. Their three-dimensional structures, when bound to the chitin-derived trisaccharide, have been deduced by NMR spectroscopy. By using DYANA and restrained molecular dynamics simulations with the AMBER 5.0 force field, the three-dimensional structures of the protein-sugar complexes have been obtained. The thermodynamic analysis of the interactions that occur upon complex formation have also been carried out. Regarding binding affinity, the obtained data have permitted the deduction that the larger the aromatic group, the higher the association constant and the binding enthalpy. In all cases, entropy opposes binding. In contrast, deactivation of the aromatic rings by attaching fluorine atoms decreases the binding affinity, with a concomitant decrease in enthalpy. The role of the chemical nature of the aromatic ring for establishing sugar contacts has been thus evaluated.
9862804	Structures of the psychrophilic Alteromonas haloplanctis alpha-amylase give insights into cold adaptation at a molecular level.	Background:. Enzymes from psychrophilic (cold-adapted) microorganisms operate at temperatures close to 0 degreesC, where the activity of their mesophilic and thermophilic counterparts is drastically reduced. It has generally been assumed that thermophily is associated with rigid proteins, whereas psychrophilic enzymes have a tendency to be more flexible. Results:. Insights into the cold adaptation of proteins are gained on the basis of a psychrophilic protein's molecular structure. To this end, we have determined the structure of the recombinant form of a psychrophilic alpha-amylase from Alteromonas haloplanctis at 2.4 A resolution. We have compared this with the structure of the wild-type enzyme, recently solved at 2.0 A resolution, and with available structures of their mesophilic counterparts. These comparative studies have enabled us to identify possible determinants of cold adaptation. Conclusions:. We propose that an increased resilience of the molecular surface and a less rigid protein core, with less interdomain interactions, are determining factors of the conformational flexibility that allows efficient enzyme catalysis in cold environments.
8917445	Chemically and conformationally authentic active domain of human tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 refolded from bacterial inclusion bodies.	The aggregation of recombinant proteins into inclusion bodies is a major problem for expression in bacterial systems. The inclusion bodies must be solubilized and the denatured protein renatured if an active molecule is to be recovered. We have developed such a procedure for the active N-terminal domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 [TIMP-2-(1-127)], a small mammalian protein containing three disulfide bonds. Conditions for its renaturation were determined by studying the refolding behaviour of reduced and denatured mammalian-cell-expressed TIMP-(1-127) by intrinsic fluorescence. This strategy allows the development of a refolding protocol before generation of a bacterial expression system, and allows rapid and systematic optimization of each refolding variable by assessing its effect on the rate and extent of the refolding reaction. TIMP-(1-127) was expressed at high levels in Escherichia coli, and refolded from TIMP-2-(1-127) inclusion bodies, by means of the method developed with mammalian-cell-expressed protein, to give a refolding efficiency of 30-40% and a final yield of 11-14 mg purified protein/l culture. The chemical structure and conformation of this material was characterized by electrospray mass spectrometry and two-dimensional 1H-NMR; no significant differences were found between it and the native protein. Mass analysis of uniformly 13C-labeled and 15N-labeled protein was used to help identify a mistranslated TIMP-(1-127) contaminant in the purified refolded sample. This technique provides additional information on the nature of the modification and allows a distinction to be made between those modifications that are cell derived, and those that arise from subsequent handling of the protein.
12230574	NblA from Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 is a mostly alpha-helical protein undergoing reversible trimerization in solution.	The nblA family of genes encodes for small proteins necessary for the ordered degradation of phycobilisomes under certain stress conditions, a process known as chlorosis. Genes homologous to nblA seem to occur in all phycobilisome-containing organisms. However, to date, no molecular mechanism is known for the action of NblA, nor have the gene products been characterized to understand the physical properties of the molecule and thus help elucidate the mechanism on a structural basis. In this study we report on the first characterization of an NblA-homologous gene product. The chromosomal gene from the cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 was cloned, heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli and purified to apparent homogeneity. This allowed the protein to be characterized by analytical ultracentrifugation and CD spectroscopy. These experiments show that the NblA protein has a mostly alpha-helical structure, undergoing an association reaction of folded monomers to form trimers in solution. No dimers are detectable.
8395021	Structure of gelsolin segment 1-actin complex and the mechanism of filament severing.	The structure of the segment 1 domain of gelsolin, a protein that fragments actin filaments in cells, is reported in complex with actin. Segment 1 binds monomer using an apolar patch rimmed by hydrogen bonds in a cleft between actin domains. On the actin filament model it binds tangentially, disrupting only those contacts between adjacent subunits in one helical strand. The segment 1 fold is general for all segments of the gelsolin family because the conserved residues form the core of the structure. It also provides a basis for understanding the origin of an amyloidosis caused by a gelsolin variant.
15299834	Binding of the antiviral drug WIN51711 to the sabin strain of type 3 poliovirus: structural comparison with drug binding in rhinovirus 14.	The crystal structure of the Sabin strain of type 3 poliovirus (P3/Sabin) complexed with the antiviral drug WIN51711 has been determined at 2.9 A resolution. Drugs of this kind are known to inhibit the uncoating of the virus during infection, by stabilizing the capsid against receptor-induced conformational changes. The electron density for the bound drug is very well defined so that its position and orientation are unambiguous. The drug binds in a nearly extended conformation, slightly bent in the middle, in a blind pocket formed predominantly by hydrophobic residues in the core of the beta-barrel of capsid protein VP1. Comparisons between this structure, the corresponding drug complex in human rhinovirus 14 (HRV 14), and the native structures of both viruses demonstrate that the binding of WIN51711 has markedly different effects on the structures of these two viruses. Unlike HRV14, wherein large conformational changes are observed in the coat protein after drug binding, the binding of this drug in poliovirus does not induce any significant conformational changes in the structure of the capsid protein, though the drug has a greater inhibitory effect in P3/Sabin than in HRV14. The implications of this result for the mechanism of capsid stabilization are discussed.
11387196	A structural pathway for activation of the kinesin motor ATPase.	Molecular motors move along actin or microtubules by rapidly hydrolyzing ATP and undergoing changes in filament-binding affinity with steps of the nucleotide hydrolysis cycle. It is generally accepted that motor binding to its filament greatly increases the rate of ATP hydrolysis, but the structural changes in the motor associated with ATPase activation are not known. To identify the conformational changes underlying motor movement on its filament, we solved the crystal structures of three kinesin mutants that decouple nucleotide and microtubule binding by the motor, and block microtubule-activated, but not basal, ATPase activity. Conformational changes in the structures include a disordered loop and helices in the switch I region and a visible switch II loop, which is disordered in wild-type structures. Switch I moved closer to the bound nucleotide in two mutant structures, perturbing water-mediated interactions with the Mg2+. This could weaken Mg2+ binding and accelerate ADP release to activate the motor ATPASE: The structural changes we observe define a signaling pathway within the motor for ATPase activation that is likely to be essential for motor movement on microtubules.
8642596	Crystal structures of CO-, deoxy- and met-myoglobins at various pH values.	The distal histidine residue, His64(E7), and the proximal histidine residue, His93(F8), in myoglobin (Mb) are important for the function of the protein. For example, the increase in the association rate constant for CO binding at low pH has been suggested to be caused by the protonation of these histidine residues. In order to investigate the influence of protonation on the structure of myoglobin, we determined the crystal structures of sperm whale myoglobin to 2.0 A or better in different states of ligation (MbCO, deoxyMb and metMb) at pH values of 4, 5 and 6. The most dramatic change found at low pH is that His64 swings out of the distal pocket in the MbCO structure at pH 4, opening a direct channel from the solvent to the iron atom. This rotation seems to be facilitated by conformational changes in the CD corner. The benzyl side-chain of Phe46(CD4), which has been suggested to be a critical residue in controlling the rotation of His64, moves away from His64 at pH 4 in the deoxyMb structure, allowing more free rotation of His64. Arg45(CD3) is also important for the dynamics of myoglobin, since it influences the pK(a) of His64 and forms a hydrogen bond lattice that hinders the rotation of His64 at neutral pH. This hydrogen-bond lattice disappears at low pH. Although His64 rotates out of the distal pocket in the MbCO structure at pH 4, leaving more space for the CO ligand, the Fe-C-O angle refines to about 130 degrees, the same as those at pH 5 and 6. In the MbCO structure at pH 4, significant conformational changes appear in the EF corner. The peptide plane between Lys79(EF2) and Gly80(EF3) flips about 150 degrees. The occupancy of this conformation in the MbCO structures increases with decreases in pH. On the proximal side of the heme, the bond between the heme iron atom and N(epsilon) of His93 remains intact under the experimental conditions in the MbCO and deoxyMb structures, but appears elongated in the metMb structure at pH 4, representing either a weakened bond or the breakage of the bond in some fraction of the molecules in the crystal.
4843141	The structure of the oxidized form of clostridial flavodoxin at 1.9-A resolution.	null
11130079	Structure of the bacteriophage phi29 DNA packaging motor.	Motors generating mechanical force, powered by the hydrolysis of ATP, translocate double-stranded DNA into preformed capsids (proheads) of bacterial viruses and certain animal viruses. Here we describe the motor that packages the double-stranded DNA of the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi29 into a precursor capsid. We determined the structure of the head-tail connector--the central component of the phi29 DNA packaging motor--to 3.2 A resolution by means of X-ray crystallography. We then fitted the connector into the electron densities of the prohead and of the partially packaged prohead as determined using cryo-electron microscopy and image reconstruction analysis. Our results suggest that the prohead plus dodecameric connector, prohead RNA, viral ATPase and DNA comprise a rotary motor with the head-prohead RNA-ATPase complex acting as a stator, the DNA acting as a spindle, and the connector as a ball-race. The helical nature of the DNA converts the rotary action of the connector into translation of the DNA.
16192572	Characterization of the metal ion binding site in the anti-terminator protein, HutP, of Bacillus subtilis.	HutP is an RNA-binding protein that regulates the expression of the histidine utilization (hut) operon in Bacillus subtilis, by binding to cis-acting regulatory sequences on hut mRNA. It requires L-histidine and an Mg2+ ion for binding to the specific sequence within the hut mRNA. In the present study, we show that several divalent cations can mediate the HutP-RNA interactions. The best divalent cations were Mn2+, Zn2+ and Cd2+, followed by Mg2+, Co2+ and Ni2+, while Cu2+, Yb2+ and Hg2+ were ineffective. In the HutP-RNA interactions, divalent cations cannot be replaced by monovalent cations, suggesting that a divalent metal ion is required for mediating the protein-RNA interactions. To clarify their importance, we have crystallized HutP in the presence of three different metal ions (Mg2+, Mn2+ and Ba2+), which revealed the importance of the metal ion binding site. Furthermore, these analyses clearly demonstrated how the metal ions cause the structural rearrangements that are required for the hut mRNA recognition.
7972015	Activated Ras interacts with the Ral guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator.	The yeast two-hybrid system was used to identify proteins that interact with Ras. The H-Ras protein was found to interact with a guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator (GDS) that has been previously shown to regulate guanine nucleotide exchange on another member of the Ras protein family, Ral. The interaction is mediated by the C-terminal, noncatalytic segment of the RalGDS and can be detected both in vivo, using the two-hybrid system, and in vitro, with purified recombinant proteins. The interaction of the RalGDS C-terminal segment with Ras is specific, dependent on activation of Ras by GTP, and blocked by a mutation that affects Ras effector function. These characteristics are similar to those previously demonstrated for the interaction between Ras and its putative effector, Raf, suggesting that the RalGDS may also be a Ras effector. Consistent with this idea, the RalGDS was found to inhibit the binding of Raf to Ras.
15299790	Difference refinement: obtaining differences between two related structures.	There are many examples in macromolecular crystallography where interest focuses on the differences between a previously determined 'native' structure and a nearly isomorphous 'variant'. In such cases, a useful approach to atomic refinement of the variant structure is through weighted least-squares minimization of the residual between the observed and calculated differences in amplitudes of structure factors, a strategy first used in the refinement of deoxycobalt hemoglobin [Fermi, Perutz, Dickinson & Chien (1982). J. Mol. Biol. 155, 495-505] and termed 'difference refinement'. For cases in which the modeling errors for the native and variant structures are correlated, theoretical arguments indicate that difference refinement should lead to improved estimates of structural differences when compared with conventional independent refinement. Tests employing simulated peptide data sets and real data from a wild-type protein and a mutant show that difference refinement can substantially reduce errors in the differences between structures when compared with independent refinement. The algorithm is very easy to implement and does not increase the computational demands of refinement.
11867764	Conserved tryptophan in the core domain of transglutaminase is essential for catalytic activity.	Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is a distinctive member of the family of Ca2+-dependent enzymes recognized mostly by their abilities to catalyze the posttranslational crosslinking of proteins. TG2 uniquely binds and hydrolyzes GTP; binding GTP inhibits its crosslinking activity but allows it to function in signal transduction (hence the G(h) designation). The core domain of TG2 (residues 139-471, rat) comprises the papain-like catalytic triad and the GTP-binding domain (residues 159-173) and contains almost all of the conserved tryptophans of the protein. Examining point mutations at Trp positions 180, 241, 278, 332, and 337 showed that, upon binding 2'-(or 3')-O-(N-methylanthraniloyl)GTP (mantGTP), the Phe-332 mutant was the weakest (35% less than wild type) in resonance energy transfer from the protein (lambda(exc, max) = 290 nm) to the mant fluorophore (lambda(em) = 444 nm) and had a reduced affinity for mantGTP. Trp-332, situated near the catalytic center and the nucleotide-binding area of TG2, may be part of the allosteric relay machinery that transmits negative effector signals from nucleotide binding to the active center of TG2. A most important observation was that, whereas no enzyme activity could be detected when Trp-241 was replaced with Ala or Gln, partial preservation of catalytic activity was seen with substitutions by Tyr > Phe > His. The results indicate that Trp-241 is essential for catalysis, possibly by stabilizing the transition states by H-bonding, quadrupole-ion, or van der Waals interactions. This contrasts with the evolutionarily related papain family of cysteine proteases, which uses Gln-19 (papain) for stabilizing the transition state.
3663686	The roles of conserved aromatic amino-acid residues in the active site of human lysozyme: a site-specific mutagenesis study.	In order to probe the roles of Tyr-63, Trp-64 and Trp-109 in the active site of human lysozyme (peptidoglycan N-acetylmuramoylhydrolase, EC 3.2.1.17), six human lysozymes containing a mutation, Tyr-63 to Leu, Trp-64 to Phe or Tyr, Trp-109 to Phe or Tyr, and Glu-35 to Asp, were newly synthesized and their immunological and enzymatical activities were examined in comparison with the native enzyme. Enzymatic characterization indicated: (i) that the existences of an aromatic residue at position 63 and a tryptophan residue at position 64 are essential for the effective hydrolysis of glycol chitin substrate, but not for the lysis of bacterial substrate; (ii) that the conversion of Trp-109 to Phe or Tyr reduces the maximal velocity of the lytic reaction to 25% of the wild-type enzyme; however, the apparent affinity constant is not affected. Further, the difference between the activity against the charged substrate and that against the non-charged substrate was discussed from a viewpoint of the electrostatic interaction between enzyme and substrate.
3072018	The engineering of binding affinity at metal ion binding sites for the stabilization of proteins: subtilisin as a test case.	A weak Ca2+ binding site in the bacterial serine protease subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) was chosen as a model to explore the feasibility of stabilizing a protein by increasing the binding affinity at a metal ion binding site. The existence of this weak Ca2+ binding site was first discovered through a study of the rate of thermal inactivation of wild-type subtilisin BPN' at 65 degrees C as a function of the free [Ca2+]. Increasing the [Ca2+] in the range 0.10-100 mM caused a 100-fold decrease in the rate of thermal inactivation. The data were found to closely fit a theoretical titration curve for a single Ca2+ specific binding site with an apparent log Ka = 1.49. A series of refined X-ray crystal structures (R less than or equal to 0.15, 1.7 A) of subtilisin in the presence of 0.0, 25.0, and 40.0 mM CaCl2 has allowed a detailed structural characterization of this Ca2+ binding site. Negatively charged side chains were introduced in the vicinity of the bound Ca2+ by changing Pro 172 and Gly 131 to Asp residues through site-directed and random mutagenesis techniques, respectively. These changes were found to increase the affinity of the Ca2+ binding site by 3.4- and 2-fold, respectively, when compared with the wild-type protein (ionic strength = 0.10). X-ray studies of these new variants of subtilisin revealed the carboxylate side chains to be 6.8 and 13.2 A, respectively, from the bound Ca2+. These distances and the degree of enhanced binding are consistent with simple electrostatic theory.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
12963370	ALS mutants of human superoxide dismutase form fibrous aggregates via framework destabilization.	Many point mutations in human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD) cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disorder in heterozygotes. Here we show that these mutations cluster in protein regions influencing architectural integrity. Furthermore, crystal structures of SOD wild-type and FALS mutant H43R proteins uncover resulting local framework defects. Characterizations of beta-barrel (H43R) and dimer interface (A4V) FALS mutants reveal reduced stability and drastically increased aggregation propensity. Moreover, electron and atomic force microscopy indicate that these defects promote the formation of filamentous aggregates. The filaments resemble those seen in neurons of FALS patients and bind both Congo red and thioflavin T, suggesting the presence of amyloid-like, stacked beta-sheet interactions. These results support free-cysteine-independent aggregation of FALS mutant SOD as an integral part of FALS pathology. They furthermore provide a molecular basis for the single FALS disease phenotype resulting from mutations of diverse side-chains throughout the protein: many FALS mutations reduce structural integrity, lowering the energy barrier for fibrous aggregation.
7492558	X-ray crystallographic studies on hexameric insulins in the presence of helix-stabilizing agents, thiocyanate, methylparaben, and phenol.	Three X-ray crystallographic studies have been carried out on pig insulin in the presence of three ligands, thiocyanate, methylparaben (methyl p-hydroxybenzoate), and phenol. In each case, rhombohedral crystals were obtained, which diffracted to 1.8, 1.9, and 2.3 A, respectively. Each crystal structure was very similar to that of 4-zinc pig insulin, which was used as a starting model for PROLSQ refinement (Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4, 1994). The R factors for the refined structures of thiocyanate insulin, methylparaben insulin, and phenol insulin were 19.6, 18.4, and 19.1, respectively. Each crystal structure consists of T3R3f insulin hexamers with two zinc ions per hexamer. In the R3f trimer of the thiocyanate insulin hexamer, one thiocyanate ion is coordinated to the zinc on the hexamer 3-fold axis, but there is no evidence of zinc ion binding in the off-axis zinc ion sites seen in the 4-zinc pig insulin structure. In the methylparaben insulin and phenol insulin hexamers, the phenolic ligands are bound at the dimer-dimer interfaces in the R3f trimers in a manner similar to that of phenol in R6 phenol insulin. The binding of methylparaben appears to make the hexamer more compact by drawing the A and the B chains closer together in the binding site. In all three structures presented herein, the conformations of the first three residues of the B chain in the R3f trimer are extended rather than alpha-helical, as is seen in R6 phenol insulin. The energetics of ligand binding in the insulin hexamer are discussed.
15289463	The X-ray structure of the papillomavirus helicase in complex with its molecular matchmaker E2.	DNA replication of the papillomaviruses is specified by cooperative binding of two proteins to the ori site: the enhancer E2 and the viral initiator E1, a distant member of the AAA+ family of proteins. Formation of this prereplication complex is an essential step toward the construction of a functional, multimeric E1 helicase and DNA melting. To understand how E2 interacts with E1 to regulate this process, we have solved the X-ray structure of a complex containing the HPV18 E2 activation domain bound to the helicase domain of E1. Modeling the monomers of E1 to a hexameric helicase shows that E2 blocks hexamerization of E1 by shielding a region of the E1 oligomerization surface and stabilizing a conformation of E1 that is incompatible with ATP binding. Further biochemical experiments and structural analysis show that ATP is an allosteric effector of the dissociation of E2 from E1. Our data provide the first molecular insights into how a protein can regulate the assembly of an oligomeric AAA+ complex and explain at a structural level why E2, after playing a matchmaker role by guiding E1 to the DNA, must dissociate for subsequent steps of initiation to occur. Building on previously proposed ideas, we discuss how our data advance current models for the conversion of E1 in the prereplication complex to a hexameric helicase assembly.
12909636	An essential role for aspartate 264 in catalysis by tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from Escherichia coli.	tRNA-guanine transglycosylase (TGT) catalyzes a post-transcriptional base-exchange reaction involved in the incorporation of the modified base queuine (Q) into the wobble position of certain tRNAs. Catalysis by TGT occurs through a double-displacement mechanism that involves the formation of a covalent enzyme-RNA intermediate (Kittendorf, J. D., Barcomb, L. M., Nonekowski, S. T., and Garcia, G. A. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 14123-14133). The TGT chemical mechanism requires the protonation of the displaced guanine and the deprotonation of the incoming heterocyclic base. Based on its position in the active site, it is likely that aspartate 264 is involved in these proton transfer events. To investigate this possibility, site-directed mutagenesis was employed to convert aspartate 264 to alanine, asparagine, glutamate, glutamine, lysine, and histidine. Biochemical characterization of these TGT mutants revealed that only the conservative glutamate mutant retained catalytic activity, with Km values for both tRNA and guanine 3-fold greater than those for wild-type, whereas the kcat was depressed by an order of magnitude. Furthermore, of these six TGT mutants, only the TGT(D264E) was capable of forming a TGT.RNA covalent intermediate; however, unlike wild-type TGT, only hydroxylamine is capable of cleaving the TGT(D264E).RNA covalent complex. In an effort to better understand the unique biochemical properties of the D264E TGT mutant, we solved the crystal structure of the Zymomonas mobilis TGT with the analogous mutation (D280E). The results of these studies support two roles for aspartate 264 in catalysis by TGT, protonation of the leaving guanine and deprotonation of the incoming preQ1.
16337651	The allosteric mechanism of yeast chorismate mutase: a dynamic analysis.	The effector-regulated allosteric mechanism of yeast chorismate mutase (YCM) was studied by normal mode analysis and targeted molecular dynamics. The normal mode analysis shows that the conformational change between YCM in the R state and in the T state can be represented by a relatively small number of low-frequency modes. This suggests that the transition is coded in the structure and is likely to have a low energetic barrier. Quantitative comparisons (i.e. frequencies) between the low-frequency modes of YCM with and without effectors (modeled structures) reveal that the binding of Trp increases the global flexibility, whereas Tyr decreases global flexibility. The targeted molecular dynamics simulation of substrate analog release from the YCM active site suggests that a series of residues are critical for orienting and "recruiting" the substrate. The simulation led to the switching of a series of substrate-release-coupled salt-bridge partners in the ligand-binding domain; similar changes occur in the transition between YCM R-state and T-state crystal structures. Thus, the normal mode analysis and targeted molecular dynamics results provide evidence that the effectors regulate YCM activity by influencing the global flexibility. The change in flexibility is coupled to the binding of substrate to the T state and release of the product from the R state, respectively.
11224571	The L3 loop and C-terminal phosphorylation jointly define Smad protein trimerization.	Smad proteins mediate the transforming growth factor beta responses. C-terminal phosphorylation of R-Smads leads to the recruitment of Smad4 and the formation of active signaling complexes. We investigated the mechanism of phosphorylation-induced Smad complex formation with an activating pseudo-phosphorylated Smad3. Pseudo-phosphorylated Smad3 has a greater propensity to homotrimerize, and recruits Smad4 to form a heterotrimer containing two Smad3 and one Smad4. The trimeric interaction is mediated through conserved interfaces to which tumorigenic mutations map. Furthermore, a conserved Arg residue within the L3 loop, located near the C-terminal phosphorylation sites of the neighboring subunit, is essential for trimerization. We propose that the phosphorylated C-terminal residues interact with the L3 loop of the neighboring subunit to stabilize the trimer interaction.
10848964	Crystal structure of cambialistic superoxide dismutase from porphyromonas gingivalis.	The crystal structure of cambialistic superoxide dismutase (SOD) from Porphyromonas gingivalis, which exhibits full activity with either Fe or Mn at the active site, has been determined at 1.8-A resolution by molecular replacement and refined to a crystallographic R factor of 17.9% (Rfree 22.3%). The crystals belong to the space group P212121 (a = 75.5 A, b = 102.7 A, c = 99.6 A) with four identical subunits in the asymmetric unit. Each pair of subunits forms a compact dimer, but not a tetramer, with 222 point symmetry. Each subunit has 191 amino-acid residues most of which are visible in electron density maps, and consists of seven alpha helices and one three-stranded antiparallel beta sheet. The metal ion, a 3 : 1 mixture of Fe and Mn, is coordinated with five ligands (His27, His74, His161, Asp157, and water) arranged at the vertices of a trigonal bipyramid. Although the overall structural features, including the metal coordination geometry, are similar to those found in other single-metal containing SODs, P. gingivalis SOD more closely resembles the dimeric Fe-SODs from Escherichia coli rather than another cambialistic SOD from Propionibacterium shermanii, which itself is rather similar to other tetrameric SODs.
7918391	Solution structure of the active domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2. A new member of the OB fold protein family.	Homonuclear two-dimensional and three-dimensional 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy has been used to obtain essentially complete sequence-specific assignments for 123 of the 127 amino acid residues present in the truncated form of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (delta TIMP-2), the active N-terminal domain of the protein. Analysis of the through-space nuclear Overhauser effect data obtained for delta TIMP-2 allowed determination of both the secondary structure of the domain and also a low-resolution tertiary structure defining the protein backbone topology. The protein contains a five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet that is rolled over on itself to form a closed beta-barrel, and two short helices which pack close to one another on the same barrel face. A comparison of the delta TIMP-2 structure with other known protein folds reveals that the beta-barrel topology is homologous to that seen in proteins of the oligosaccharide/oligonucleotide binding (OB) fold family. The common structural features include the number of beta-strands and their arrangement, the beta-barrel shear number, an interstrand hydrogen bond network, the packing of the hydrophobic core, and a conserved beta-bulge. Superpositions of the beta-barrels from delta TIMP-2 and two previously known members of the OB protein fold family (staphylococcal nuclease and Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin) confirmed the similarity in beta-barrel topology. The three-dimensional structure of delta TIMP-2 has allowed a more detailed interpretation than was previously possible of the functional significance of available protein sequence and site-directed mutagenesis data for the TIMP family. Furthermore, the structure has revealed conserved surface regions of potential functional importance.
10811226	Structural insights into the stereochemistry of the cyclooxygenase reaction.	Cyclooxygenases are bifunctional enzymes that catalyse the first committed step in the synthesis of prostaglandins, thromboxanes and other eicosanoids. The two known cyclooxygenases isoforms share a high degree of amino-acid sequence similarity, structural topology and an identical catalytic mechanism. Cyclooxygenase enzymes catalyse two sequential reactions in spatially distinct, but mechanistically coupled active sites. The initial cyclooxygenase reaction converts arachidonic acid (which is achiral) to prostaglandin G2 (which has five chiral centres). The subsequent peroxidase reaction reduces prostaglandin G2 to prostaglandin H2. Here we report the co-crystal structures of murine apo-cyclooxygenase-2 in complex with arachidonic acid and prostaglandin. These structures suggest the molecular basis for the stereospecificity of prostaglandin G2 synthesis.
7493956	Crystallographic studies of the interaction of cyclodextrin glycosyltransferase from Bacillus circulans strain 251 with natural substrates and products.	Asp-229, Glu-257, and Asp-328 constitute the catalytic residues in cyclodextrin glycosyl transferase from Bacillus circulans strain 251. Via site-directed mutagenesis constructed D229N, E257Q, and D328N mutant proteins showed a 4,000-60,000-fold reduction of cyclization activity. A D229N/E257Q double mutant showed a 700,000-fold reduction and was crystallized for use in soaking experiments with alpha-cyclodextrin. Crystal structures were determined of wild type CGTase soaked at elevated pH with alpha-cyclodextrin (resolution, 2.1 A) and maltoheptaose (2.4 A). In addition, structures at cryogenic temperature were solved of the unliganded enzyme (2.2 A) and of the D229N/E257Q mutant after soaking with alpha-cyclodextrin (2.6 A). In the crystals soaked in alpha-cyclodextrin and maltoheptaose, a maltotetraose molecule is observed to bind in the active site. Residue 229 is at hydrogen bonding distance from the C-6 hydroxyl group of the sugar, which after cleavage will contain the new reducing end. In the D229N/E257Q double mutant structure, two alpha-cyclodextrins are observed to replace two maltoses at the E-domain, thus providing structural information on product inhibition via binding to the enzyme's raw starch binding domain.
14617621	A substrate-induced switch in the reaction mechanism of a thermophilic esterase: kinetic evidences and structural basis.	The reaction mechanism of the esterase 2 (EST2) from Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius was studied at the kinetic and structural level to shed light on the mechanism of activity and substrate specificity increase previously observed in its double mutant M211S/R215L. In particular, the values of kinetic constants (k1, k(-1), k2, and k3) along with activation energies (E1, E(-1), E2, and E3) were measured for wild type and mutant enzyme. The previously suggested substrate-induced switch in the reaction mechanism from kcat=k3 with a short acyl chain substrate (p-nitrophenyl hexanoate) to kcat=k2 with a long acyl chain substrate (p-nitrophenyl dodecanoate) was validated. The inhibition afforded by an irreversible inhibitor (1-hexadecanesulfonyl chloride), structurally related to p-nitrophenyl dodecanoate, was studied by kinetic analysis. Moreover the three-dimensional structure of the double mutant bound to this inhibitor was determined, providing essential information on the enzyme mechanism. In fact, structural analysis explained the observed substrate-induced switch because of an inversion in the binding mode of the long acyl chain derivatives with respect to the acyl- and alcohol-binding sites.
7982928	Probing protein-protein interactions. The ribose-binding protein in bacterial transport and chemotaxis.	A number of mutations at Gly134 of the periplasmic ribose-binding protein of Escherichia coli were examined by a combined biochemical and structural approach. Different mutations gave rise to different patterns of effects on the chemotaxis and transport functions. The smallest residue (alanine) had the least effect on transport, whereas large hydrophobic residues had the smallest effect on chemotaxis. Comparison of the x-ray crystal structure of the G134R mutant protein (2.5-A resolution) to that of the wild type (1.6-A resolution) showed that the basic structure of the protein was unaltered. The loss of chemotaxis and transport functions in this and similar mutant proteins must therefore be caused by relatively simple surface effects, which include a change in local main chain conformation. The loss of chemotaxis and transport functions resulting from the introduction of an alanine residue at position 134 was suppressed by an additional isoleucine to threonine mutation at residue 132. An x-ray structure of the I132T/G134A double mutant protein (2.2-A resolution) showed that the changes in local structure were accompanied by a diffuse pattern of structural changes in the surrounding region, implying that the suppression derives from a combination of sources.
15784618	Probing the mechanism of ligand recognition in family 29 carbohydrate-binding modules.	The recycling of photosynthetically fixed carbon, by the action of microbial plant cell wall hydrolases, is integral to one of the major geochemical cycles and is of considerable industrial importance. Non-catalytic carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) play a key role in this degradative process by targeting hydrolytic enzymes to their cognate substrate within the complex milieu of polysaccharides that comprise the plant cell wall. Family 29 CBMs have, thus far, only been found in an extracellular multienzyme plant cell wall-degrading complex from the anaerobic fungus Piromyces equi, where they exist as a CBM29-1:CBM29-2 tandem. Here we present both the structure of the CBM29-1 partner, at 1.5 A resolution, and examine the importance of hydrophobic stacking interactions as well as direct and solvent-mediated hydrogen bonds in the binding of CBM29-2 to different polysaccharides. CBM29 domains display unusual binding properties, exhibiting specificity for both beta-manno- and beta-gluco-configured ligands such as mannan, cellulose, and glucomannan. Mutagenesis reveals that "stacking" of tryptophan residues in the n and n+2 subsites plays a critical role in ligand binding, whereas the loss of tyrosine-mediated stacking in the n+4 subsite reduces, but does not abrogate, polysaccharide recognition. Direct hydrogen bonds to ligand, such as those provided by Arg-112 and Glu-78, play a pivotal role in the interaction with both mannan and cellulose, whereas removal of water-mediated interactions has comparatively little effect on carbohydrate binding. The interactions of CBM29-2 with the O2 of glucose or mannose contribute little to binding affinity, explaining why this CBM displays dual gluco/manno specificity.
9514636	Involvement of glutamic acid residue at position 7 in the formation of the intramolecular disulfide bond of Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin Ip in vivo.	Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin Ip (STIp) is a small peptide toxin composed of 18 amino acid residues containing three intramolecular disulfide bonds. We found previously that the bonds are formed by the catalysis of DsbA (a oxidoreductase) in periplasm [1]. To interact with DsbA, the STIp in periplasm must have a structure suitable as substrate. However, the amino acid residues contributing to the construction of this structure have not been elucidated. We mutated the codon for the glutamic acid at position 7 of STIp by oligonucleotide site-specific mutagenesis in vivo and analysed the STIp produced from the mutant gene. The intramolecular disulfide bonds were not formed in mutant STIp (Glu-7-->Ala), but were formed in mutant STIp (Glu-7-->Asp). Furthermore, we found that replacing the asparagine residue at position 11 and the proline residue at position 12 did not affect the disulfide bond formation of STIp. The results indicate that a negative charge at position 7 in the sequence of STIp is necessary for STIp to interact with DsbA in periplasm.
12208978	Crystal structures of Zidovudine- or Lamivudine-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptases containing mutations at codons 41, 184, and 215.	Six structures of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) containing combinations of resistance mutations for zidovudine (AZT) (M41L and T215Y) or lamivudine (M184V) have been determined as inhibitor complexes. Minimal conformational changes in the polymerase or nonnucleoside RT inhibitor sites compared to the mutant RTMC (D67N, K70R, T215F, and K219N) are observed, indicating that such changes may occur only with certain combinations of mutations. Model building M41L and T215Y into HIV-1 RT-DNA and docking in ATP that is utilized in the pyrophosphorolysis reaction for AZT resistance indicates that some conformational rearrangement appears necessary in RT for ATP to interact simultaneously with the M41L and T215Y mutations.
15299734	Structural refinement of the DNA-containing capsid of canine parvovirus using RSRef, a resolution-dependent stereochemically restrained real-space refinement method.	The canine parvovirus structure (CPV) [Tsao, Chapman, Agbandje, Keller, Smith, Wu, Luo, Smith, Rossmann, Compans & Parrish (1991). Science, 251, 1456-1464] has been refined by a real-space refinement procedure [Chapman (1994). Acta Cryst. A51, 69-801. The fit of an atomic model to electron density was optimized while taking into account the resolution limit of the data and the stereochemistry of the structure. The refined model had a reasonable free R factor [Brtinger (1992). Nature (London), 355, 472-4751 of 0.29. The method is particularly fast and convenient when only a small fraction of the crystallographic asymmetric unit needs to be refined, as is the case when there is high non-crystallographic redundancy. Cycles of refinement for virus capsids were completed in about 1/50th of the time required for equivalent reciprocal-space procedures.
7754395	The crystal structure of urease from Klebsiella aerogenes.	The crystal structure of urease from Klebsiella aerogenes has been determined at 2.2 A resolution and refined to an R factor of 18.2 percent. The enzyme contains four structural domains: three with novel folds playing structural roles, and an (alpha beta)8 barrel domain, which contains the bi-nickel center. The two active site nickels are 3.5 A apart. One nickel ion is coordinated by three ligands (with low occupancy of a fourth ligand) and the second is coordinated by five ligands. A carbamylated lysine provides an oxygen ligand to each nickel, explaining why carbon dioxide is required for the activation of urease apoenzyme. The structure is compatible with a catalytic mechanism whereby urea ligates Ni-1 to complete its tetrahedral coordination and a hydroxide ligand of Ni-2 attacks the carbonyl carbon. A surprisingly high structural similarity between the urease catalytic domain and that of the zinc-dependent adenosine deaminase reveals a remarkable example of active site divergence.
14581558	Structures of host range-controlling regions of the capsids of canine and feline parvoviruses and mutants.	Canine parvovirus (CPV) and feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) differ in their ability to infect dogs and dog cells. Canine cell infection is a specific property of CPV and depends on the ability of the virus to bind the canine transferrin receptor (TfR), as well as other unidentified factors. Three regions in the capsid structure, located around VP2 residues 93, 300, and 323, can all influence canine TfR binding and canine cell infection. These regions were compared in the CPV and FPV capsid structures that have been determined, as well as in two new structures of CPV capsids that contain substitutions of the VP2 Asn-93 to Asp and Arg, respectively. The new structures, determined by X-ray crystallography to 3.2 and 3.3 A resolutions, respectively, clearly showed differences in the interactions of residue 93 with an adjacent loop on the capsid surface. Each of the three regions show small differences in structure, but each appears to be structurally independent of the others, and the changes likely act together to affect the ability of the capsid to bind the canine TfR and to infect canine cells. This emphasizes the complex nature of capsid alterations that change the virus-cell interaction to allow infection of cells from different hosts.
12627952	The 1.75 A crystal structure of acetyl-CoA synthetase bound to adenosine-5'-propylphosphate and coenzyme A.	Acetyl-coenzyme A synthetase catalyzes the two-step synthesis of acetyl-CoA from acetate, ATP, and CoA and belongs to a family of adenylate-forming enzymes that generate an acyl-AMP intermediate. This family includes other acyl- and aryl-CoA synthetases, firefly luciferase, and the adenylation domains of the modular nonribosomal peptide synthetases. We have determined the X-ray crystal structure of acetyl-CoA synthetase complexed with adenosine-5'-propylphosphate and CoA. The structure identifies the CoA binding pocket as well as a new conformation for members of this enzyme family in which the approximately 110-residue C-terminal domain exhibits a large rotation compared to structures of peptide synthetase adenylation domains. This domain movement presents a new set of residues to the active site and removes a conserved lysine residue that was previously shown to be important for catalysis of the adenylation half-reaction. Comparison of our structure with kinetic and structural data of closely related enzymes suggests that the members of the adenylate-forming family of enzymes may adopt two different orientations to catalyze the two half-reactions. Additionally, we provide a structural explanation for the recently shown control of enzyme activity by acetylation of an active site lysine.
11112523	Estimation of the hydrophobic effect in an antigen-antibody protein-protein interface.	Antigen-antibody complexes provide useful models for analyzing the thermodynamics of protein-protein association reactions. We have employed site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystallography, and isothermal titration calorimetry to investigate the role of hydrophobic interactions in stabilizing the complex between the Fv fragment of the anti-hen egg white lysozyme (HEL) antibody D1.3 and HEL. Crystal structures of six FvD1.3-HEL mutant complexes in which an interface tryptophan residue (V(L)W92) has been replaced by residues with smaller side chains (alanine, serine, valine, aspartate, histidine, and phenylalanine) were determined to resolutions between 1.75 and 2.00 A. In the wild-type complex, V(L)W92 occupies a large hydrophobic pocket on the surface of HEL and constitutes an energetic "hot spot" for antigen binding. The losses in apolar buried surface area in the mutant complexes, relative to wild-type, range from 25 (V(L)F92) to 115 A(2) (V(L)A92), with no significant shifts in the positions of protein atoms at the mutation site for any of the complexes except V(L)A92, where there is a peptide flip. The affinities of the mutant Fv fragments for HEL are 10-100-fold lower than that of the original antibody. Formation of all six mutant complexes is marked by a decrease in binding enthalpy that exceeds the decrease in binding free energy, such that the loss in enthalpy is partly offset by a compensating gain in entropy. No correlation was observed between decreases in apolar, polar, or aggregate (sum of the apolar and polar) buried surface area in the V(L)92 mutant series and changes in the enthalpy of formation. Conversely, there exist linear correlations between losses of apolar buried surface and decreases in binding free energy (R(2) = 0.937) as well as increases in the solvent portion of the entropy of binding (R(2) = 0.909). The correlation between binding free energy and apolar buried surface area corresponds to 21 cal mol(-1) A(-2) (1 cal = 4.185 J) for the effective hydrophobicity at the V(L)92 mutation site. Furthermore, the slope of the line defined by the correlation between changes in binding free energy and solvent entropy approaches unity, demonstrating that the exclusion of solvent from the binding interface is the predominant energetic factor in the formation of this protein complex. Our estimate of the hydrophobic contribution to binding at site V(L)92 in the D1.3-HEL interface is consistent with values for the hydrophobic effect derived from classical hydrocarbon solubility models. We also show how residue V(L)W92 can contribute significantly less to stabilization when buried in a more polar pocket, illustrating the dependence of the hydrophobic effect on local environment at different sites in a protein-protein interface.
12065400	Plasticity in protein-DNA recognition: lac repressor interacts with its natural operator 01 through alternative conformations of its DNA-binding domain.	The lac repressor-operator system is a model system for understanding protein-DNA interactions and allosteric mechanisms in gene regulation. Despite the wealth of biochemical data provided by extensive mutations of both repressor and operator, the specific recognition mechanism of the natural lac operators by lac repressor has remained elusive. Here we present the first high-resolution structure of a dimer of the DNA-binding domain of lac repressor bound to its natural operator 01. The global positioning of the dimer on the operator is dramatically asymmetric, which results in a different pattern of specific contacts between the two sites. Specific recognition is accomplished by a combination of elongation and twist by 48 degrees of the right lac subunit relative to the left one, significant rearrangement of many side chains as well as sequence-dependent deformability of the DNA. The set of recognition mechanisms involved in the lac repressor-operator system is unique among other protein-DNA complexes and presents a nice example of the adaptability that both proteins and DNA exhibit in the context of their mutual interaction.
15865427	Role of the intramolecular hydrogen bond network in the inhibitory power of chymotrypsin inhibitor 2.	A series of mutants of chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 (CI2), at residues involved in intramolecular interactions that shape and constrain the binding loop, were studied to determine their relative importance for inhibition of the serine protease subtilisin BPN', and for resistance of the inhibitor to proteolysis. These functional properties were investigated in tandem with the crystal structures of the mutant inhibitor-enzyme complexes. A dense hydrogen bonding network that supports the binding loop in the vicinity of the scissile bond was found to be important both for enzyme affinity and for stability to proteolysis. Structural analysis, in combination with biochemical measurements, allows differentiation of the structural components most important for resistance to proteolysis and/or binding. The most critical participating residues in the network were found to be Thr-58, Glu-60, Arg-65, and Gly-83. Glu-60 is more important for resistance to proteolysis than for binding, while Arg-65 and two other Arg residues play a greater role in binding than in resistance to proteolysis. Structural comparisons reveal a wide variety of subtle conformational changes in response to mutation, with built-in robustness in the hydrogen bond network, such that loss of one contact is compensated by other new contacts.
16008571	Structural basis for the changed substrate specificity of Drosophila melanogaster deoxyribonucleoside kinase mutant N64D.	The Drosophila melanogaster deoxyribonucleoside kinase (Dm-dNK) double mutant N45D/N64D was identified during a previous directed evolution study. This mutant enzyme had a decreased activity towards the natural substrates and decreased feedback inhibition with dTTP, whereas the activity with 3'-modified nucleoside analogs like 3'-azidothymidine (AZT) was nearly unchanged. Here, we identify the mutation N64D as being responsible for these changes. Furthermore, we crystallized the mutant enzyme in the presence of one of its substrates, thymidine, and the feedback inhibitor, dTTP. The introduction of the charged Asp residue appears to destabilize the LID region (residues 167-176) of the enzyme by electrostatic repulsion and no hydrogen bond to the 3'-OH is made in the substrate complex by Glu172 of the LID region. This provides a binding space for more bulky 3'-substituents like the azido group in AZT but influences negatively the interactions between Dm-dNK, substrates and feedback inhibitors based on deoxyribose. The detailed picture of the structure-function relationship provides an improved background for future development of novel mutant suicide genes for Dm-dNK-mediated gene therapy.
8114095	Crystal structure of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase refined at 2 A resolution. Implications for a large conformational change during catalysis.	The crystal structures of three forms of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase have been refined: the oxidized form of the wild-type enzyme at 2.1 A resolution, a variant containing a cysteine to serine mutation at the active site (Cys138Ser) at 2.0 A resolution, and a complex of this variant with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) at 2.3 A resolution. The enzyme mechanism involves the transfer of reducing equivalents from reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) to a disulfide bond in the enzyme, via a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Thioredoxin reductase contains FAD and NADPH binding domains that are structurally similar to the corresponding domains of the related enzyme glutathione reductase. The relative orientation of these domains is, however, very different in the two enzymes: when the FAD domains of thioredoxin and glutathione reductases are superimposed, the NADPH domain of one is rotated by 66 degrees with respect to the other. The observed binding mode of NADP+ in thioredoxin reductase is non-productive in that the nicotinamide ring is more than 17 A from the flavin ring system. While in glutathione reductase the redox active disulfide is located in the FAD domain, in thioredoxin reductase it is in the NADPH domain and is part of a four-residue sequence (Cys-Ala-Thr-Cys) that is close in structure to the corresponding region of thioredoxin (Cys-Gly-Pro-Cys), with a root-mean-square deviation of 0.22 A for atoms in the disulfide bonded ring. There are no significant conformational differences between the structure of the wild-type enzyme and that of the Cys138Ser mutant, except that a disulfide bond is not present in the latter. The disulfide bond is positioned productively in this conformation of the enzyme, i.e. it stacks against the flavin ring system in a position that would facilitate its reduction by the flavin. However, the cysteine residues are relatively inaccessible for interaction with the substrate, thioredoxin. These results suggest that thioredoxin reductase must undergo conformational changes during enzyme catalysis. All three structures reported here are for the same conformation of the enzyme and no direct evidence is available as yet for such conformational changes. The simplest possibility is that the NADPH domain rotates between the conformation observed here and an orientation similar to that seen in glutathione reductase. This would alternately place the nicotinamide ring and the disulfide bond near the flavin ring, and expose the cysteine residues for reaction with thioredoxin in the hypothetical conformation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
11772019	Probing the role of the chloride ion in the mechanism of human pancreatic alpha-amylase.	Human pancreatic alpha-amylase (HPA) is a member of the alpha-amylase family involved in the degradation of starch. Some members of this family, including HPA, require chloride for maximal activity. To determine the mechanism of chloride activation, a series of mutants (R195A, R195Q, N298S, R337A, and R337Q) were made in which residues in the chloride ion binding site were replaced. Mutations in this binding site were found to severely affect the ability of HPA to bind chloride ions with no binding detected for the R195 and R337 mutant enzymes. X-ray crystallographic analysis revealed that these mutations did not result in significant structural changes. However, the introduction of these mutations did alter the kinetic properties of the enzyme. Mutations to residue R195 resulted in a 20-450-fold decrease in the activity of the enzyme toward starch and shifted the pH optimum to a more basic pH. Interestingly, replacement of R337 with a nonbasic amino acid resulted in an alpha-amylase that no longer required chloride for catalysis and has a pH profile similar to that of wild-type HPA. In contrast, a mutation at residue N298 resulted in an enzyme that had much lower binding affinity for chloride but still required chloride for maximal activity. We propose that the chloride is required to increase the pK(a) of the acid/base catalyst, E233, which would otherwise be lower due to the presence of R337, a positively charged residue.
3398051	Crystallization of haloalkane dehalogenase from Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10.	Haloalkane dehalogenases are enzymes that release chloride or bromide from n-halogenated alkanes. X-ray quality crystals of haloalkane dehalogenase from the 1,2-dichloroethane-degrading bacterium Xanthobacter autotrophicus GJ10 have been grown at room temperature from 64% saturated ammonium sulfate solutions (pH 6.2 to 6.4). The crystals diffract in the X-ray beam to at least 2.4 A resolution (1 A = 0.1 nm). Their space group is P2(1)2(1)2, with cell dimensions a = 94.1 A, b = 72.8 A, c = 41.4 A and alpha = beta = gamma = 90 degrees. There is one monomer (molecular weight 36,000) per asymmetric unit.
7175934	FAD-binding site of glutathione reductase.	null
10545127	Structure and function of an archaeal topoisomerase VI subunit with homology to the meiotic recombination factor Spo11.	In all organisms, type II DNA topoisomerases are essential for untangling chromosomal DNA. We have determined the structure of the DNA-binding core of the Methanococcus jannaschii DNA topoisomerase VI A subunit at 2.0 A resolution. The overall structure of this subunit is unique, demonstrating that archaeal type II enzymes are distinct from other type II topoisomerases. However, the core structure contains a pair of domains that are also found in type IA and classic type II topoisomerases. Together, these regions may form the basis of a DNA cleavage mechanism shared among these enzymes. The core A subunit is a dimer that contains a deep groove that spans both protomers. The dimer architecture suggests that DNA is bound in the groove, across the A subunit interface, and that the two monomers separate during DNA transport. The A subunit of topoisomerase VI is homologous to the meiotic recombination factor, Spo11, and this structure can serve as a template for probing Spo11 function in eukaryotes.
15209499	Nickel superoxide dismutase structure and mechanism.	The 1.30 A resolution crystal structure of nickel superoxide dismutase (NiSOD) identifies a novel SOD fold, assembly, and Ni active site. NiSOD is a hexameric assembly of right-handed 4-helix bundles of up-down-up-down topology with N-terminal hooks chelating the active site Ni ions. This newly identified nine-residue Ni-hook structural motif (His-Cys-X-X-Pro-Cys-Gly-X-Tyr) provides almost all interactions critical for metal binding and catalysis, and thus will likely be diagnostic of NiSODs. Conserved lysine residues are positioned for electrostatic guidance of the superoxide anion to the narrow active site channel. Apo structures show that the Ni-hook motif is unfolded prior to metal binding. The active site Ni geometry cycles from square planar Ni(II), with thiolate (Cys2 and Cys6) and backbone nitrogen (His1 and Cys2) ligands, to square pyramidal Ni(III) with an added axial His1 side chain ligand, consistent with electron paramagentic resonance spectroscopy. Analyses of the three NiSOD structures and comparisons to the Cu,Zn and Mn/Fe SODs support specific molecular mechanisms for NiSOD maturation and catalysis, and identify important structure-function relationships conserved among SODs.
12098779	Synthesis and oxidative refolding of hainantoxin-IV.	Hainantoxin-IV, a neutoxic peptide from the spider Selenocosimia hainana, was synthesized by solid-phase method with fluorenylmethyoxycarbonyl amino acids (Fmoc-AA). Reverse-phase HPLC was used to monitor the oxidative folding of synthetic Hainantoxin-IV under different reaction conditions in order to find optimal conditions for renaturation of synthetic Hainantoxin-IV. The best renaturation yield was received in 5 mmol/L GSH and 0.5 mmol/L GSSG at pH 8.0 in 0.1 mol/L Tris-HCl and 0.1 mol/L NaCl buffer. The renaturated Hainantoxin-IV was monitored with MALDI-TOF MS  reverse-phase HPLC and isolated mouse phrenic nerve-diaphragm preparation.
15159559	Short hydrogen bonds in photoactive yellow protein.	Eight high-resolution crystal structures of the ground state of photoactive yellow protein (PYP) solved under a variety of conditions reveal that its chromophore is stabilized by two unusually short hydrogen bonds. Both Tyr42 Oeta and Glu46 Oepsilon are separated from the chromophore phenolate oxygen by less than the sum of their atomic van der Waals radii, 2.6 angstroms. This is characteristic of strong hydrogen bonding, in which hydrogen bonds acquire significant covalent character. The hydrogen bond from the protonated Glu46 to the negatively charged phenolate oxygen is 2.58 +/- 0.01 angstroms in length, while that from Tyr42 is considerably shorter, 2.49 +/- 0.01 angstroms. The E46Q mutant was solved to 0.95 angstroms resolution; the isosteric mutation increased the length of the hydrogen bond from Glx46 to the chromophore by 0.29 +/- 0.01 angstroms to that of an average hydrogen bond, 2.88 +/- 0.01 angstroms. The very short hydrogen bond from Tyr42 explains why mutating this residue has such a severe effect on the ground-state structure and PYP photocycle. The effect of isosteric mutations on the photocycle can be largely explained by the alterations to the length and strength of these hydrogen bonds.
14512736	Solution structure of the hypothetical protein YqgF from Escherichia coli reveals an RNAse H fold.	null
12732650	Lactococcus lactis dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A mutants reveal important facets of the enzymatic function.	Dihydroorotate dehydrogenases (DHODs) are flavoenzymes catalyzing the oxidation of (S)-dihydroorotate to orotate in the biosynthesis of UMP, the precursor of all other pyrimidine nucleotides. On the basis of sequence, DHODs can be divided into two classes, class 1, further divided in subclasses 1A and 1B, and class 2. This division corresponds to differences in cellular location and the nature of the electron acceptor. Herein we report a study of Lactococcus lactis DHODA, a representative of the class 1A enzymes. Based on the DHODA structure we selected seven residues that are highly conserved between both main classes of DHODs as well as three residues representing surface charges close to the active site for site-directed mutagenesis. The availability of both kinetic and structural data on the mutant enzymes allowed us to define the roles individual structural segments play in catalysis. We have also structurally proven the presence of an open active site loop in DHODA and obtained information about the interactions that control movements of loops around the active site. Furthermore, in one mutant structure we observed differences between the two monomers of the dimer, confirming an apparent asymmetry between the two substrate binding sites that was indicated by the kinetic results.
14661963	Infrared spectroscopic and mutational studies on putidaredoxin-induced conformational changes in ferrous CO-P450cam.	Ferrous-carbon monoxide bound form of cytochrome P450cam (CO-P450cam) has two infrared (IR) CO stretching bands at 1940 and 1932 cm(-1). The former band is dominant (>95% in area) for CO-P450cam free of putidaredoxin (Pdx), while the latter band is dominant (>95% in area) in the complex of CO-P450cam with reduced Pdx. The binding of Pdx to CO-P450cam thus evokes a conformational change in the heme active site. To study the mechanism involved in the conformational change, surface amino acid residues Arg79, Arg109, and Arg112 in P450cam were replaced with Lys, Gln, and Met. IR spectroscopic and kinetic analyses of the mutants revealed that an enzyme that has a larger 1932 cm(-1) band area upon Pdx-binding has a larger catalytic activity. Examination of the crystal structures of R109K and R112K suggested that the interaction between the guanidium group of Arg112 and Pdx is important for the conformational change. The mutations did not change a coupling ratio between the hydroxylation product and oxygen consumed. We interpret these findings to mean that the interaction of P450cam with Pdx through Arg112 enhances electron donation from the proximal ligand (Cys357) to the O-O bond of iron-bound O(2) and, possibly, promotes electron transfer from reduced Pdx to oxyP450cam, thereby facilitating the O-O bond splitting.
387599	Purification and partial characterization of heat-stable enterotoxin of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.	Heat-stable enterotoxin was purified from a strain of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 53402 A-1 from human intestine. The cells were cultured in Casamino Acids-yeast extract-salts medium, and the purification procedure consisted of protamine sulfate treatment of the culture supernatant, ultrafiltration with an Amicon PM-10 membrane, diethylaminoethyl-cellulose column chromatography, hydroxyapatite column chromatography, Bio-Gel P-10 gel filtration, 90% ethanol extraction, and preparative polyacrylamide gel disc electrophoresis. About 300-fold purification was achieved, with a yield of about 12%. However, the homogeneity of the purified heat-stable enterotoxin was not rigorously demonstrated. The purified heat-stable enterotoxin had an absorption maximum at about 275 nm, and its isoelectric point was about 3.90. The molecular weight of the purified heat-stable enterotoxin was ca. 4,000 by Sephadex G-100 gel filtration. The minimum effective dose of purified heat-stable enterotoxin was about 2.5 ng in the suckling mouse assay. The purified heat-stable enterotoxin gave a positive reaction in not only the suckling mouse assay but also the mouse intestinal loop test and the guinea pig skin permeability test.
15003452	Crystal structures of the catalytic domain of phosphodiesterase 4B complexed with AMP, 8-Br-AMP, and rolipram.	Phosphodiesterase catalyzes the hydrolysis of the intracellular second messenger 3',5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP) into the corresponding 5'-nucleotide. Phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4), the major cAMP-specific PDE in inflammatory and immune cells, is an attractive target for the treatment of asthma and COPD. We have determined crystal structures of the catalytic domain of PDE4B complexed with AMP (2.0 A), 8-Br-AMP (2.13 A) and the potent inhibitor rolipram (2.0 A). All the ligands bind in the same hydrophobic pocket and can interact directly with the active site metal ions. The identity of these metal ions was examined using X-ray anomalous difference data. The structure of the AMP complex confirms the location of the catalytic site and allowed us to speculate about the detailed mechanism of catalysis. The high-resolution structures provided the experimental insight into the nucleotide selectivity of phosphodiesterase. 8-Br-AMP binds in the syn conformation to the enzyme and demonstrates an alternative nucleotide-binding mode. Rolipram occupies much of the AMP-binding site and forms two hydrogen bonds with Gln443 similar to the nucleotides.
2059620	Redox enzyme engineering: conversion of human glutathione reductase into a trypanothione reductase.	The substrate specificity of the human enzyme glutathione reductase was changed from its natural substrate glutathione to trypanothione [N1,N8-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine] by site-directed mutagenesis of two residues. The glutathione analogue, trypanothione, is the natural substrate for trypanothione reductase, an enzyme found in trypanosomatids and leishmanias, the causative agents of diseases such as African sleeping sickness, Chagas disease, and Oriental sore. The rational bases for our mutational experiments were the availability of a high-resolution X-ray structure for human glutathione reductase with bound substrates, the active site sequence comparisons of human glutathione reductase and the trypanothione reductases from Trypanosoma congolense and Trypanosoma cruzi, a complementary set of mutants in T. congolense trypanothione reductase, and the properties of substrate analogues of trypanothione. Mutation of two residues, A34----E34 and R37----W37, in the glutathione-binding site of human glutathione reductase switches human glutathione reductase into a trypanothione reductase with a preference for trypanothione over glutathione by a factor of 700 using kcat/Km as a criterion.
10947986	Twists in catalysis: alternating conformations of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase.	In thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) from Escherichia coli, cycles of reduction and reoxidation of the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor depend on rate-limiting rearrangements of the FAD and NADPH (reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) domains. We describe the structure of the flavin-reducing conformation of E. coli TrxR at a resolution of 3.0 angstroms. The orientation of the two domains permits reduction of FAD by NADPH and oxidation of the enzyme dithiol by the protein substrate, thioredoxin. The alternate conformation, described by Kuriyan and co-workers, permits internal transfer of reducing equivalents from reduced FAD to the active-site disulfide. Comparison of these structures demonstrates that switching between the two conformations involves a "ball-and-socket" motion in which the pyridine nucleotide-binding domain rotates by 67 degrees.
16167343	Crystal structure of Hsp33 chaperone (TM1394) from Thermotoga maritima at 2.20 A resolution.	
11470436	Crystal structures of mitochondrial processing peptidase reveal the mode for specific cleavage of import signal sequences.	BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP) is a metalloendopeptidase that cleaves the N-terminal signal sequences of nuclear-encoded proteins targeted for transport from the cytosol to the mitochondria. Mitochondrial signal sequences vary in length and sequence, but each is cleaved at a single specific site by MPP. The cleavage sites typically contain an arginine at position -2 (in the N-terminal portion) from the scissile peptide bond in addition to other distal basic residues, and an aromatic residue at position +1. Mitochondrial import machinery recognizes amphiphilic helical conformations in signal sequences. However, it is unclear how MPP specifically recognizes diverse presequence substrates. RESULTS: The crystal structures of recombinant yeast MPP and a cleavage-deficient mutant of MPP complexed with synthetic signal peptides have been determined. MPP is a heterodimer; its alpha and beta subunits are homologous to the core II and core I proteins, respectively, of the ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex. Crystal structures of two different synthetic substrate peptides cocrystallized with the mutant MPP each show the peptide bound in an extended conformation at the active site. Recognition sites for the arginine at position -2 and the +1 aromatic residue are observed. CONCLUSIONS: MPP bound two mitochondrial import presequence peptides in extended conformations in a large polar cavity. The presequence conformations differ from the amphiphilic helical conformation recognized by mitochondrial import components. Our findings suggest that the presequences adopt context-dependent conformations through mitochondrial import and processing, helical for recognition by mitochondrial import machinery and extended for cleavage by the main processing component.
8955188	Assembly, specific binding, and crystallization of a human TCR-alphabeta with an antigenic Tax peptide from human T lymphotropic virus type 1 and the class I MHC molecule HLA-A2.	T lymphocytes use TCR-alphabeta to bind and to recognize complexes of antigenic peptides bound to MHC proteins located at the surface of APCs. We have assembled and crystallized this intercellular complex of TCR/peptide/MHC from soluble human TCR-alphabeta and soluble peptide/HLA-A2 complexes. The soluble TCR-alphabeta binds specifically to its in vivo ligand, the complex of HLA-A2, and a peptide from the Tax protein of human T lymphotropic virus type 1. The soluble TCR also binds in vitro to an altered peptide ligand, which appears to be a partial agonist in T cell assays as determined by its ability to elicit different cytolytic and lymphokine secretion responses. Heterodimerization and the antigenic specificity of the TCR do not require its interchain disulfide bond, transmembrane segments, or glycosylations. Crystals of the TCR/peptide/HLA-A2 complex diffract x-rays, providing the means to study in atomic detail the mechanism of Ag-specific cell-cell recognition between T cells and target cells.
2716847	Structural plasticity broadens the specificity of an engineered protease.	The substrate specificity of alpha-lytic protease has been changed dramatically, with a concomitant increase in activity, by replacing an active-site Met with Ala. The substrate specificity of both this mutant and another similar mutant are extraordinarily broad. X-ray crystallographic analysis shows that structural plasticity, a combination of alternate side-chain conformations and binding-site flexibility, allows both large and small substrates to be well accommodated.
12861225	Crystal structure of human cytochrome P450 2C9 with bound warfarin.	Cytochrome P450 proteins (CYP450s) are membrane-associated haem proteins that metabolize physiologically important compounds in many species of microorganisms, plants and animals. Mammalian CYP450s recognize and metabolize diverse xenobiotics such as drug molecules, environmental compounds and pollutants. Human CYP450 proteins CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 are the major drug-metabolizing isoforms, and contribute to the oxidative metabolism of more than 90% of the drugs in current clinical use. Polymorphic variants have also been reported for some CYP450 isoforms, which has implications for the efficacy of drugs in individuals, and for the co-administration of drugs. The molecular basis of drug recognition by human CYP450s, however, has remained elusive. Here we describe the crystal structure of a human CYP450, CYP2C9, both unliganded and in complex with the anti-coagulant drug warfarin. The structure defines unanticipated interactions between CYP2C9 and warfarin, and reveals a new binding pocket. The binding mode of warfarin suggests that CYP2C9 may undergo an allosteric mechanism during its function. The newly discovered binding pocket also suggests that CYP2C9 may simultaneously accommodate multiple ligands during its biological function, and provides a possible molecular basis for understanding complex drug-drug interactions.
9514271	The response of T4 lysozyme to large-to-small substitutions within the core and its relation to the hydrophobic effect.	To further examine the structural and thermodynamic basis of hydrophobic stabilization in proteins, all of the bulky non-polar residues that are buried or largely buried within the core of T4 lysozyme were substituted with alanine. In 25 cases, including eight reported previously, it was possible to determine the crystal structures of the variants. The structures of four variants with double substitutions were also determined. In the majority of cases the "large-to-small" substitutions lead to internal cavities. In other cases declivities or channels open to the surface were formed. In some cases the structural changes were minimal (mainchain shifts < or = 0.3 A); in other cases mainchain atoms moved up to 2 A. In the case of Ile 29 --> Ala the structure collapsed to such a degree that the volume of the putative cavity was zero. Crystallographic analysis suggests that the occupancy of the engineered cavities by solvent is usually low. The mutants Val 149 --> Ala (V149A) and Met 6 --> Ala (M6A), however, are exceptions and have, respectively, one and two well-ordered water molecules within the cavity. The Val 149 --> Ala substitution allows the solvent molecule to hydrogen bond to polar atoms that are occluded in the wild-type molecule. Similarly, the replacement of Met 6 with alanine allows the two solvent molecules to hydrogen bond to each other and to polar atoms on the protein. Except for Val 149 --> Ala the loss of stability of all the cavity mutants can be rationalized as a combination of two terms. The first is a constant for a given class of substitution (e.g., -2.1 kcal/mol for all Leu --> Ala substitutions) and can be considered as the difference between the free energy of transfer of leucine and alanine from solvent to the core of the protein. The second term can be considered as the energy cost of forming the cavity and is consistent with a numerical value of 22 cal mol(-1) A(-3). Physically, this term is due to the loss of van der Waal's interactions between the bulky sidechain that is removed and the atoms that form the wall of the cavity. The overall results are consistent with the prior rationalization of Leu --> Ala mutants in T4 lysozyme by Eriksson et al. (Eriksson et al., 1992, Science 255:178-183).
16168436	Crystal structures of active SRC kinase domain complexes.	c-Src was the first proto-oncoprotein to be identified, and has become the focus of many drug discovery programs. Src structures of a major inactive form have shown how the protein kinase is rigidified by several interdomain interactions; active configurations of Src are generated by release from this "assembled" or "bundled" form. Despite the importance of Src as a drug target, there is relatively little structural information available regarding the presumably more flexible active forms. Here we report three crystal structures of a dimeric active c-Src kinase domain, in an apo and two ligand complexed forms, with resolutions ranging from 2.9A to 1.95A. The structures show how the kinase domain, in the absence of the rigidifying interdomain interactions of the inactivation state, adopts a more open and flexible conformation. The ATP site inhibitor CGP77675 binds to the protein kinase with canonical hinge hydrogen bonds and also to the c-Src specific threonine 340. In contrast to purvalanol B binding in CDK2, purvalanol A binds in c-Src with a conformational change in a more open ATP pocket.
12065398	Structural basis for the interaction between NTF2 and nucleoporin FxFG repeats.	Interactions with nucleoporins containing FxFG-repeat cores are crucial for the nuclear import of RanGDP mediated by nuclear transport factor 2 (NTF2). We describe here the 1.9 A resolution crystal structure of yeast NTF2-N77Y bound to a FxFG-nucleoporin core, which provides a basis for understanding this interaction and its role in nuclear trafficking. The two identical FxFG binding sites on the dimeric molecule are formed by residues from each chain of NTF2. Engineered mutants at the interaction interface reduce the binding of NTF2 to nuclear pores and cause reduced growth rates and Ran mislocalization when substituted for the wild-type protein in yeast. Comparison with the crystal structure of FG-nucleoporin cores bound to importin-beta and TAP/p15 identified a number of common features of their binding sites. The structure of the binding interfaces on these transport factors provides a rationale for the specificity of their interactions with nucleoporins that, combined with their weak binding constants, facilitates rapid translocation through NPCs during nuclear trafficking.
7756982	Crystal structure of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase reconstituted with the modified FAD present in alcohol oxidase from methylotrophic yeasts: evidence for an arabinoflavin.	The flavin prosthetic group (FAD) of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens was replaced by a stereochemical analog, which is spontaneously formed from natural FAD in alcohol oxidases from methylotrophic yeasts. Reconstitution of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from apoprotein and modified FAD is a rapid process complete within seconds. Crystals of the enzyme-substrate complex of modified FAD-containing p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase diffract to 2.1 A resolution. The crystal structure provides direct evidence for the presence of an arabityl sugar chain in the modified form of FAD. The isoalloxazine ring of the arabinoflavin adenine dinucleotide (a-FAD) is located in a cleft outside the active site as recently observed in several other p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase complexes. Like the native enzyme, a-FAD-containing p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase preferentially binds the phenolate form of the substrate (pKo = 7.2). The substrate acts as an effector highly stimulating the rate of enzyme reduction by NADPH (kred > 500 s-1). The oxidative part of the catalytic cycle of a-FAD-containing p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase differs from native enzyme. Partial uncoupling of hydroxylation results in the formation of about 0.3 mol of 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate and 0.7 mol of hydrogen peroxide per mol NADPH oxidized. It is proposed that flavin motion in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is important for efficient reduction and that the flavin "out" conformation is associated with the oxidase activity.
15681871	Molecular determinants of substrate specificity in the feruloyl esterase module of xylanase 10B from Clostridium thermocellum.	Feruloyl esterases play a key role in the degradation of the intricate structure of the plant cell wall by hydrolysing the ferulate ester groups involved in the cross-linking between hemicelluloses and between hemicellulose and lignin. The structure of the feruloyl esterase module of Clostridium thermocellum cellulosomal xylanase 10B has been reported previously. It displays the alpha/beta hydrolase fold with a classical Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad. Here, the structures of a Ser-Ala mutant of this feruloyl esterase in complexes with methyl syringate, methyl sinapinate and methyl vanillate are described. Substrate binding is accompanied by subtle conformational changes at amino acids Trp982, Met955, Asn1023 and Ile1019 in the ligand-binding cavity. The structural determinants, particularly the m-methoxy substituent, governing the substrate specificity of Xyn10B feruloyl esterase are rationalized.
12590921	The active site of the molybdenum cofactor biosynthetic protein domain Cnx1G.	The final step of molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in plants is catalyzed by the two-domain protein Cnx1. The G domain of Cnx1 (Cnx1G) binds molybdopterin with high affinity and transfers molybdenum to molybdopterin. Here, we describe the functional and structural characterization of structure-based Cnx1G mutants. For molybdopterin binding residues Thr542 and Ser573 were found to be important because different mutations of those residues resulted in 7- to 26-fold higher k(D) values for molybdopterin binding. Furthermore, we showed that the terminal phosphate of molybdopterin is directly involved in protein-pterin interactions as dephosphorylated molybdopterin binds with one magnitude of order lower affinity to the wild-type protein. Molybdopterin binding was not affected in mutants defective in Ser476, Asp486, or Asp515. However, molybdenum insertion was completely abolished, indicating their important role for catalysis. Based on these results we propose the binding of molybdopterin to a large depression in the structure of Cnx1G formed by beta5, alpha5, beta6, and alpha6, whereas the negatively charged depression formed by the loop between beta3 and alpha4, the N-terminal end of alpha2, the 3(10) helix, and the region between beta6 and alpha6 is involved in catalysis.
16216071	C-terminal tyrosine of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase in hydride transfer processes with NAD(P)+/H.	Ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase (FNR) catalyzes the reduction of NADP+ to NADPH in an overall reversible reaction, showing some differences in the mechanisms between cyanobacterial and higher plant FNRs. During hydride transfer it is proposed that the FNR C-terminal Tyr is displaced by the nicotinamide. Thus, this C-terminal Tyr might be involved not only in modulating the flavin redox properties, as already shown, but also in nicotinamide binding and hydride transfer. FNR variants from the cyanobacterium Anabaena in which the C-terminal Tyr has been replaced by Trp, Phe, or Ser have been produced. All FNR variants show enhanced NADP+ and NAD+ binding, especially Tyr303Ser, which correlates with a noticeable improvement of NADH-dependent reactions. Nevertheless, the Tyr303Ser variant shows a decrease in the steady-state kcat value with NADPH. Fast kinetic analysis of the hydride transfer shows that the low efficiency observed for this mutant FNR under steady-state conditions is not due to a lack of catalytic ability but rather to the strong enzyme-coenzyme interaction. Three-dimensional structures for Tyr303Ser and Tyr303Trp variants and its complexes with NADP+ show significant differences between plant and cyanobacterial FNRs. Our results suggest that modulation of coenzyme affinity is highly influenced by the strength of the C-terminus-FAD interaction and that subtle changes between plant and cyanobacterial structures are able to modify the energy of that interaction. Additionally, it is shown that the C-terminal Tyr of FNR lowers the affinity for NADP+/H to levels compatible with steady-state turnover during the catalytic cycle, but it is not involved in the hydride transfer itself.
15207495	Regulation of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis PE/PPE genes.	The genome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis encodes approximately 170 members of the unique mycobacterial PE and PPE gene families. Evidence suggests members of these families are surface-associated cell wall proteins that may provide a diverse antigenic profile and affect immunity. To determine if the expression patterns of PE/PPE genes are consistent with a role in antigenic variability, we analyzed microarray data from 132 experimental conditions for expression of PE/PPE genes. Whole genome expression patterns show that the PE/PPE genes are regulated in a variable and largely independent manner. Gene expression profiling of 15 unique conditions identified differential regulation of 128 of the 169 PE/PPE genes. Expression of the PE/PPE genes appears to be controlled by a variety of independent mechanisms. These data indicate that differential expression of the PE/PPE genes has the potential to provide a dynamic antigenic profile during the course of changing microenvironments within the host.
1279434	Crystal structure of a Src-homology 3 (SH3) domain.	The Src-homologous SH3 domain is a small domain present in a large number of proteins that are involved in signal transduction, such as the Src protein tyrosine kinase, or in membrane-cytoskeleton interactions, but the function of SH3 is still unknown (reviewed in refs 1-3). Here we report the three-dimensional structure at 1.8 A resolution of the SH3 domain of the cytoskeletal protein spectrin expressed in Escherichia coli. The domain is a compact beta-barrel made of five antiparallel beta-strands. The amino acids that are conserved in the SH3 sequences are located close to each other on one side of the molecule. This surface is rich in aromatic and carboxylic amino acids, and is distal to the region of the molecule where the N and C termini reside and where SH3 inserts into the alpha-spectrin chain. We suggest that a protein ligand binds to this conserved surface of SH3.
3900416	Refined structure of alpha-lytic protease at 1.7 A resolution. Analysis of hydrogen bonding and solvent structure.	The structure of alpha-lytic protease, a serine protease produced by the bacterium Lysobacter enzymogenes, has been refined at 1.7 A resolution. The conventional R-factor is 0.131 for the 14,996 reflections between 8 and 1.7 A resolution with I greater than or equal to 2 sigma (I). The model consists of 1391 protein atoms, two sulfate ions and 156 water molecules. The overall root-meansquare error is estimated to be about 0.14 A. The refined structure was compared with homologous enzymes alpha-chymotrypsin and Streptomyces griseus protease A and B. A new sequence numbering was derived based on the alignment of these structures. The comparison showed that the greatest structural homology is around the active site residues Asp102, His57 and Ser195, and that basic folding pathways are maintained despite chemical changes in the hydrophobic cores. The hydrogen bonds in the structure were tabulated and the distances and angles of interaction are similar to those found in small molecules. The analysis also revealed the presence of close intraresidue interactions. There are only a few direct intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Most intermolecular interactions involve bridging solvent molecules. The structural importance of hydrogen bonds involving the side-chain of Asx residues is discussed. All the negatively charged groups have a counterion nearby, while the excess positively charged groups are exposed to the solvent. One of the sulfate ions is located near the active site, whereas the other is close to the N terminus. Of the 156 water molecules, only seven are not involved in a hydrogen bond. Six of these have polar groups nearby, while the remaining one is in very weak density. There are nine internal water molecules, consisting of two monomers, two dimers and one trimer. No significant second shell of solvent is observed.
8989327	High resolution solution structure of ribosomal protein L11-C76, a helical protein with a flexible loop that becomes structured upon binding to RNA.	The structure of the C-terminal RNA recognition domain of ribosomal protein L11 has been solved by heteronuclear three-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Although the structure can be considered high resolution in the core, 15 residues between helix alpha 1 and strand beta 1 form an extended, unstructured loop. 15N transverse relaxation measurements suggest that the loop is moving on a picosecond-to-nanosecond time scale in the free protein but not in the protein bound to RNA. Chemical shifts differences between the free protein and the bound protein suggest that the loop as well as the C-terminal end of helix alpha 3 are involved in RNA binding.
7881909	Structure of the catalytic core of the family F xylanase from Pseudomonas fluorescens and identification of the xylopentaose-binding sites.	BACKGROUND: Sequence alignment suggests that xylanases evolved from two ancestral proteins and therefore can be grouped into two families, designated F and G. Family F enzymes show no sequence similarity with any known structure and their architecture is unknown. Studies of an inactive enzyme-substrate complex will help to elucidate the structural basis of binding and catalysis in the family F xylanases. RESULTS: We have therefore determined the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of a family F enzyme, Pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa xylanase A, at 2.5 A resolution and a crystallographic R-factor of 0.20. The structure was solved using an engineered catalytic core in which the nucleophilic glutamate was replaced by a cysteine. As expected, this yielded both high-quality mercurial derivatives and an inactive enzyme which enabled the preparation of the inactive enzyme-substrate complex in the crystal. We show that family F xylanases are eight-fold alpha/beta-barrels (TIM barrels) with two active-site glutamates, one of which is the nucleophile and the other the acid-base. Xylopentaose binds to five subsites A-E with the cleaved bond between subsites D and E. Ca2+ binding, remote from the active-site glutamates, stabilizes the structure and may be involved in the binding of extended substrates. CONCLUSIONS: The architecture of P. fluorescens subsp. cellulosa has been determined crystallographically to be a commonly occurring enzyme fold, the eight-fold alpha/beta-barrel. Xylopentaose binds across the carboxy-terminal end of the alpha/beta-barrel in an active-site cleft which contains the two catalytic glutamates.
7619796	X-ray structure of the magnesium(II)-pyrophosphate complex of the truncated head of Dictyostelium discoideum myosin to 2.7 A resolution.	The structure of the magnesium pyrophosphate complex of the truncated head of Dictyostelium myosin has been determined by molecular replacement at 2.7 A resolution and refined to a crystallographic R-factor of 16.0%. The crystals belong to the orthorhombic space group P2(1)2(1)2, where a = 105.2 A, b = 182.1 A, and c = 54.5 A. The conformation of the protein around the magnesium pyrophosphate is very similar to that seen when magnesium ADP-beryllium fluoride binds in the active site. The latter complex mimics the binding of ATP prior to hydrolysis. The pyrophosphate molecule occupies the beta- and gamma-phosphate sites, where the two phosphorus atoms are in the same positions as the beta-phosphate and the BeFx moiety of the beryllium fluoride-trapped ADP. The surrounding active site residues are almost perfectly superimposable in the two structures and the hydrogen-bonding interactions that the PPi makes with the protein are essentially identical. The similarity between the MgPPi and MgADP.BeFx complex with S1Dc suggests that the conformational change, which occurs when ATP binds to actomyosin and which reduces the affinity of myosin for actin, is caused by the binding of the gamma- and beta-phosphate groups of the nucleotide. This then implies that the role of the remainder of the substrate is to increase the binding affinity for myosin and thus to drive the equilibrium toward dissociation of myosin from actin.
15642261	A structural pathway for signaling in the E46Q mutant of photoactive yellow protein.	In the bacterial photoreceptor photoactive yellow protein (PYP), absorption of blue light by its chromophore leads to a conformational change in the protein associated with differential signaling activity, as it executes a reversible photocycle. Time-resolved Laue crystallography allows structural snapshots (as short as 150 ps) of high crystallographic resolution (approximately 1.6 A) to be taken of a protein as it functions. Here, we analyze by singular value decomposition a comprehensive time-resolved crystallographic data set of the E46Q mutant of PYP throughout the photocycle spanning 10 ns-100 ms. We identify and refine the structures of five distinct intermediates and provide a plausible chemical kinetic mechanism for their inter conversion. A clear structural progression is visible in these intermediates, in which a signal generated at the chromophore propagates through a distinct structural pathway of conserved residues and results in structural changes near the N terminus, over 20 A distant from the chromophore.
1525170	Enthalpic destabilization of a mutant human lysozyme lacking a disulfide bridge between cysteine-77 and cysteine-95.	To understand the role of disulfide bridges in protein stability, the thermodynamic changes in the denaturation of two mutant human lysozymes lacking a disulfide bridge between Cys-77 and Cys-95 (C77A and C77/95A) were analyzed using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). At pH 3.0 and 57 degrees C, the stabilities of both the C77A and C77/95A mutants were decreased about 4.6 kcal.mol-1 in Gibbs free energy change. Under the same conditions, the enthalpy changes (delta H) were 94.8 and 90.8 kcal.mol-1, respectively, which were smaller than that of the wild type (100.8 kcal.mol-1). The destabilization of the mutants was caused by enthalpic factors. Although X-ray crystallography indicated that the mutants preserve the wild-type tertiary structure, removal of the disulfide bridge increased the flexibility of the native state of the mutants. This was indicated both by an increase in the crystallographic thermal factors (B-factors) and by a decrease in the affinity of N-acetylglucosamine trimer [(NAG)3] observed using isothermal titration calorimetry (DTC) due to entropic effects. Thus, the effect of cross-linking on the stability of a protein is not solely explained by the entropy change in denaturation.
9694855	Interdomain binding of NADPH in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase as suggested by kinetic, crystallographic and modeling studies of histidine 162 and arginine 269 variants.	The conserved residues His-162 and Arg-269 of the flavoprotein p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (EC 1.14.13.2) are located at the entrance of the interdomain cleft that leads toward the active site. To study their putative role in NADPH binding, His-162 and Arg-269 were selectively changed by site-specific mutagenesis. The catalytic properties of H162R, H162Y, and R269K were similar to the wild-type enzyme. However, less conservative His-162 and Arg-269 replacements strongly impaired NADPH binding without affecting the conformation of the flavin ring and the efficiency of substrate hydroxylation. The crystal structures of H162R and R269T in complex with 4-hydroxybenzoate were solved at 3.0 and 2.0 A resolution, respectively. Both structures are virtually indistinguishable from the wild-type enzyme-substrate complex except for the substituted side chains. In contrast to wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase, H162R is not inactivated by diethyl pyrocarbonate. NADPH protects wild-type p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from diethylpyrocarbonate inactivation, suggesting that His-162 is involved in NADPH binding. Based on these results and GRID calculations we propose that the side chains of His-162 and Arg-269 interact with the pyrophosphate moiety of NADPH. An interdomain binding mode for NADPH is proposed which takes a novel sequence motif (Eppink, M. H. M., Schreuder, H. A., and van Berkel, W. J. H. (1997) Protein Sci. 6, 2454-2458) into account.
16472748	A versatile conformational switch regulates reactivity in human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase.	The dehydrogenase/decarboxylase (E1b) component of the 4 MD human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC) is a thiamin diphosphate (ThDP)-dependent enzyme. We have determined the crystal structures of E1b with ThDP bound intermediates after decarboxylation of alpha-ketoacids. We show that a key tyrosine residue in the E1b active site functions as a conformational switch to reduce the reactivity of the ThDP cofactor through interactions with its thiazolium ring. The intermediates do not assume the often-postulated enamine state, but likely a carbanion state. The carbanion presumably facilitates the second E1b-catalyzed reaction, involving the transfer of an acyl moiety from the intermediate to a lipoic acid prosthetic group in the transacylase (E2b) component of the BCKDC. The tyrosine switch further remodels an E1b loop region to promote E1b binding to E2b. Our results illustrate the versatility of the tyrosine switch in coordinating the catalytic events in E1b by modulating the reactivity of reaction intermediates.
2777802	Restrained least squares refinement of native (calcium) and cadmium-substituted carp parvalbumin using X-ray crystallographic data at 1.6-A resolution.	Carp parvalbumin coordinates calcium through one carbonyl oxygen atom and the oxygen-containing side chains of 5 amino acid residues, or 4 residues and a water molecule, in a helix-loop-helix structural motif. Other calcium-binding proteins, including calmodulin and troponin C, also possess this unique calcium-binding design, which is designated EF-hand or calmodulin fold. Parvalbumin has two such sites, labeled CD and EF. Each of the calcium-binding sites of refined structures of proteins belonging to this group has a 7-oxygen coordination sphere except those of the structure of parvalbumin as it was reported in 1975. This structure had been refined at 1.9 A using difference Fourier techniques on film data. The CD site appeared to be 6-coordinate and the EF site 8-coordinate. Results of NMR experiments using 113Cd-substituted parvalbumin, however, indicate that the sites are similar to one another with coordination number greater than 6. To resolve the inconsistency between crystallographic and NMR results, 1.6 A area detector data was collected for native and cadmium-substituted parvalbumin; the structures have been refined to R factors of 18.7% and 16.4%, respectively, with acceptable geometry and low errors in atomic coordinates. Differences between the parvalbumin structure described in 1975 and the present structure are addressed, including the discovery of 7-coordination for both the CD and EF sites.
12228249	Substrate-dependent competency of the catalytic triad of prolyl oligopeptidase.	Prolyl oligopeptidase, a serine peptidase unrelated to trypsin and subtilisin, is implicated in memory disorders and is an important target of drug design. The catalytic competence of the Asp(641) residue of the catalytic triad (Ser(554), Asp(641), His(680)) was studied using the D641N and D641A variants of the enzyme. Both variants displayed 3 orders of magnitude reduction in k(cat)/K(m) for benzyloxycarbonyl-Gly-Pro-2-naphthylamide. Using an octapeptide substrate, the decrease was 6 orders of magnitude, whereas with Z-Gly-Pro-4-nitrophenyl ester there was virtually no change in k(cat)/K(m). This indicates that the contribution of Asp(641) is very much dependent on the substrate-leaving group, which was not the case for the classic serine peptidase, trypsin. The rate constant for benzyloxycarbonyl-Gly-Pro-thiobenzylester conformed to this series as demonstrated by a method designed for monitoring the hydrolysis of thiolesters in the presence of thiol groups. Alkylation of His(680) with Z-Gly-Pro-CH(2)Cl was concluded with similar rate constants for wild-type and D641A variant. However, kinetic measurements with Z-Gly-Pro-OH, a product-like inhibitor, indicated that the His(680) is not accessible in the enzyme variants. Crystal structure determination of these mutants revealed subtle perturbations related to the catalytic activity. Many of these observations show differences in the catalysis between trypsin and prolyl oligopeptidase.
10579814	Design of MKC-442 (emivirine) analogues with improved activity against drug-resistant HIV mutants.	Two analogues of the nonnucleoside inhibitor of HIV-1 RT, MKC-442 (emivirine), containing different C6 substituents have been designed to be less susceptible to the commonly found drug-resistance mutation of Tyr181Cys. Compound TNK-6123 had a C6 thiocyclohexyl group designed to have more flexibility in adapting to the mutated drug-binding site. GCA-186 had additional 3',5'-dimethyl substituents aimed at forming close contacts with the conserved residue Trp229. Both compounds showed approximately 30-fold greater inhibitory effect than MKC-442 to the Tyr181Cys mutant virus as well as to the clinically important Lys103Asn virus. X-ray crystallographic structure determination of complexes with HIV-1 RT confirmed the predicted binding modes. These strategies might be used to improve the resilience of other NNRTI series against common drug-resistance mutations.
9253408	Trapping and visualization of a covalent enzyme-phosphate intermediate.	Using a mutant version of E. coli alkaline phosphatase, we succeeded in trapping and determining the structure of the phospho-enzyme intermediate. The X-ray structure also revealed the catalytic water molecule, bound to one of the active site zinc ions, positioned ideally for the apical attack necessary for the hydrolysis of the intermediate.
11320305	Ultrahigh-resolution structure of a BPTI mutant.	The crystal structure of a mutant of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor has been refined to 0.86 A resolution using low-temperature synchrotron data. The variant contains three mutations in the binding loop (Thr11Ala, Pro13Ala, Lys15Arg) and an unrelated Met52Leu substitution. Refinement with anisotropic displacement parameters and with removal of main-chain stereochemical restraints converged with R = 0.1035. The use of full-matrix refinement provided an estimate of the variances in the derived parameters. Some stereochemical parameters, such as the planarity of the peptide group and the value of the N-C(alpha)-C angle, show a wide spread, suggesting that the standard values used as restraints in protein structure refinements may not always be entirely appropriate. Comparison with the recently determined room-temperature structure of the same mutant at 1.42 A resolution confirms the previous observations and provides new details, such as a double conformation of the main chain at Leu29 and at Gly56-Gly57, a high proportion (over 20%) of residues in double conformations, correlation of disorder through lattice contacts and the positions of H atoms, including those in water molecules, and their involvement in C-H...O and N-H...pi hydrogen bonds.
11320302	Structures of three diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR) variants with decreased repressor activity.	The diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR) from Corynebacterium diphtheriae regulates the expression of the gene on corynebacteriophages that encodes diphtheria toxin (DT). Other genes regulated by DtxR include those that encode proteins involved in siderophore-mediated iron uptake. DtxR requires activation by divalent metals and holo-DtxR is a dimeric regulator with two distinct metal-binding sites per three-domain monomer. At site 1, three side chains and a sulfate or phosphate anion are involved in metal coordination. In the DtxR-DNA complex this anion is replaced by the side chain of Glu170 provided by the third domain of the repressor. At site 2 the metal ion is coordinated exclusively by constituents of the polypeptide chain. In this paper, five crystal structures of three DtxR variants focusing on residues Glu20, Arg80 and Cys102 are reported. The resolution of these structures ranges from 2.3 to 2.8 A. The side chain of Glu20 provided by the DNA-binding domain forms a salt bridge to Arg80, which in turn interacts with the anion. Replacing either of the salt-bridge partners with an alanine reduces repressor activity substantially and it has been inferred that the salt bridge could possibly control the wedge angle between the DNA-binding domain and the dimerization domain, thereby modulating repressor activity. Cys102 is a key residue of metal site 2 and its substitution into a serine abolishes repressor activity. The crystal structures of Zn-Glu20Ala-DtxR, Zn-Arg80Ala-DtxR, Cd-Cys102Ser-DtxR and apo-Cys102Ser-DtxR in two related space groups reveal that none of these substitutions leads to dramatic rearrangements of the DtxR fold. However, the five crystal structures presented here show significant local changes and a considerable degree of flexibility of the DNA-binding domain with respect to the dimerization domain. Furthermore, all five structures deviate significantly from the structure in the DtxR-DNA complex with respect to overall domain orientation. These results confirm the importance of the hinge motion for repressor activity. Since the third domain has often been invisible in previous crystal structures of DtxR, it is also noteworthy that the SH3-like domain could be traced in four of the five crystal structures.
10926489	Crystal structure of the beta-apical domain of the thermosome reveals structural plasticity in the protrusion region.	The crystal structure of the beta-apical domain of the thermosome, an archaeal group II chaperonin from Thermoplasma acidophilum, has been determined at 2.8 A resolution. The structure shows an invariant globular core from which a 25 A long protrusion emanates, composed of an elongated alpha-helix (H10) and a long extended stretch consisting of residues GluB245-ThrB253. A comparison with previous apical domain structures reveals a large segmental displacement of the protruding part of helix H10 via the hinge GluB276-ValB278. The region comprising residues GluB245-ThrB253 adopts an extended beta-like conformation rather than the alpha-helix seen in the alpha-apical domain. Consequently, it appears that the protrusions of the apical domains from group II chaperonins might assume a variety of context-dependent conformations during an open, substrate-accepting state of the chaperonin. Sequence variations in the protrusion regions that are found in the eukaryotic TRiC/CCT subunits may provide different structural propensities and hence serve different roles in substrate recognition.
12470949	Insights into substrate binding and catalytic mechanism of human tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) from vanadate and tungstate-inhibited structures.	Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) is a DNA repair enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of a phosphodiester bond between a tyrosine residue and a DNA 3'-phosphate. The only known example of such a linkage in eukaryotic cells occurs normally as a transient link between a type IB topoisomerase and DNA. Thus human Tdp1 is thought to be responsible for repairing lesions that occur when topoisomerase I becomes stalled on the DNA in the cell. Tdp1 has also been shown to remove glycolate from single-stranded DNA containing a 3'-phosphoglycolate, suggesting a role for Tdp1 in repair of free-radical mediated DNA double-strand breaks. We report the three-dimensional structures of human Tdp1 bound to the phosphate transition state analogs vanadate and tungstate. Each structure shows the inhibitor covalently bound to His263, confirming that this residue is the nucleophile in the first step of the catalytic reaction. Vanadate in the Tdp1-vanadate structure has a trigonal bipyramidal geometry that mimics the transition state for hydrolysis of a phosphodiester bond, while Tdp1-tungstate displays unusual octahedral coordination. The presence of low-occupancy tungstate molecules along the narrow groove of the substrate binding cleft is suggestive evidence that this groove binds ssDNA. In both cases, glycerol from the cryoprotectant solution became liganded to the vanadate or tungstate inhibitor molecules in a bidentate 1,2-diol fashion. These structural models allow predictions to be made regarding the specific binding mode of the substrate and the mechanism of catalysis.
10194345	Crystal structure determination of cholesterol oxidase from Streptomyces and structural characterization of key active site mutants.	Cholesterol oxidase is a monomeric flavoenzyme which catalyzes the oxidation and isomerization of cholesterol to cholest-4-en-3-one. The enzyme interacts with lipid bilayers in order to bind its steroid substrate. The X-ray structure of the enzyme from Brevibacterium sterolicum revealed two loops, comprising residues 78-87 and residues 433-436, which act as a lid over the active site and facilitate binding of the substrate [Vrielink et al. (1991) J. Mol. Biol. 219, 533-554; Li et al. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 11507-11515]. It was postulated that these loops must open, forming a hydrophobic channel between the membrane and the active site of the protein and thus sequestering the cholesterol substrate from the aqueous environment. Here we describe the three-dimensional structure of the homologous enzyme from Streptomyces refined to 1.5 A resolution. Structural comparisons to the enzyme from B. sterolicum reveal significant conformational differences in these loop regions; in particular, a region of the loop comprising residues 78-87 adopts a small amphipathic helical turn with hydrophobic residues directed toward the active site cavity and hydrophilic residues directed toward the external surface of the molecule. It seems reasonable that this increased rigidity reduces the entropy loss that occurs upon binding substrate. Consequently, the Streptomyces enzyme is a more efficient catalyst. In addition, we have determined the structures of three active site mutants which have significantly reduced activity for either the oxidation (His447Asn and His447Gln) or the isomerization (Glu361Gln). Our structural and kinetic data indicate that His447 and Glu361 act as general base catalysts in association with conserved water H2O541 and Asn485. The His447, Glu361, H2O541, and Asn485 hydrogen bond network is conserved among other oxidoreductases. This catalytic tetrad appears to be a structural motif that occurs in flavoenzymes that catalyze the oxidation of unactivated alcohols.
10426959	Functional changes in the structure of the SRP GTPase on binding GDP and Mg2+GDP.	Ffh is a component of a bacterial ribonucleoprotein complex homologous to the signal recognition particle (SRP) of eukaryotes. It comprises three domains that mediate both binding to the hydrophobic signal sequence of the nascent polypeptide and the GTP-dependent interaction of Ffh with a structurally homologous GTPase of the SRP receptor. The X-ray structures of the two-domain 'NG' GTPase of Ffh in complex with Mg2+GDP and GDP have been determined at 2.0 A resolution. The structures explain the low nucleotide affinity of Ffh and locate two regions of structural mobility at opposite sides of the nucleotide-binding site. One of these regions includes highly conserved sequence motifs that presumably contribute to the structural trigger signaling the GTP-bound state. The other includes the highly conserved interface between the N and G domains, and supports the hypothesis that the N domain regulates or signals the nucleotide occupancy of the G domain.
2372535	Coupling between local structure and global stability of a protein: mutants of staphylococcal nuclease.	Staphylococcal nuclease exists in solution as a mixture of two folded (N and N') and two unfolded (U and U*) forms. Earlier workers [Evans et al. (1989) Biochemistry 28, 362] have proposed that the N'/N and U/U* structural differences involve cis/trans isomerization about the Lys116-Pro117 peptide bond with N and U cis and N' and U* trans. The present results show that residue changes throughout the nuclease structure have large effects on the distribution of the N and N'forms. The N'/N ratios at 313 K for nuclease H124L (N'/N = 0.07) and nuclease G79S (N'/N = 12) differ by 2 orders of magnitude. Thermodynamic parameters for equilibria linking the two folded and two unfolded substates were evaluated for seven mutants of nuclease which were found by kinetic assays to have similar enzymatic activities but by NMR spectroscopy to have a wide dispersion of thermal stabilities. Our results indicate that mutational perturbations of the N'/N equilibrium in folded nuclease (delta G for the N in equilibrium N' reaction) are strongly coupled to changes in the stability of the N form (delta G for the N in equilibrium U reaction), but much less so to the stability of the N' form (delta G for the N' in equilibrium U* reaction).
11731805	Domain alternation switches B(12)-dependent methionine synthase to the activation conformation.	B(12)-dependent methionine synthase (MetH) from Escherichia coli is a large modular protein that uses bound cobalamin as an intermediate methyl carrier. Major domain rearrangements have been postulated to explain how cobalamin reacts with three different substrates: homocysteine, methyltetrahydrofolate and S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet). Here we describe the 3.0 A structure of a 65 kDa C-terminal fragment of MetH that spans the cobalamin- and AdoMet-binding domains, arranged in a conformation suitable for the methyl transfer from AdoMet to cobalamin that occurs during activation. In the conversion to the activation conformation, a helical domain that capped the cofactor moves 26 A and rotates by 63 degrees, allowing formation of a new interface between cobalamin and the AdoMet-binding (activation) domain. Interactions with the MetH activation domain drive the cobalamin away from its binding domain in a way that requires dissociation of the axial cobalt ligand and, thereby, provide a mechanism for control of the distribution of enzyme conformations.
12359875	X-ray structure of a bifunctional protein kinase in complex with its protein substrate HPr.	HPr kinase/phosphorylase (HprK/P) controls the phosphorylation state of the phosphocarrier protein HPr and regulates the utilization of carbon sources by Gram-positive bacteria. It catalyzes both the ATP-dependent phosphorylation of Ser-46 of HPr and its dephosphorylation by phosphorolysis. The latter reaction uses inorganic phosphate as substrate and produces pyrophosphate. We present here two crystal structures of a complex of the catalytic domain of Lactobacillus casei HprK/P with Bacillus subtilis HPr, both at 2.8-A resolution. One of the structures was obtained in the presence of excess pyrophosphate, reversing the phosphorolysis reaction and contains serine-phosphorylated HPr. The complex has six HPr molecules bound to the hexameric kinase. Two adjacent enzyme subunits are in contact with each HPr molecule, one through its active site and the other through its C-terminal helix. In the complex with serine-phosphorylated HPr, a phosphate ion is in a position to perform a nucleophilic attack on the phosphoserine. Although the mechanism of the phosphorylation reaction resembles that of eukaryotic protein kinases, the dephosphorylation by inorganic phosphate is unique to the HprK/P family of kinases. This study provides the structure of a protein kinase in complex with its protein substrate, giving insights into the chemistry of the phospho-transfer reactions in both directions.
15843024	Structural insights into fusidic acid resistance and sensitivity in EF-G.	Fusidic acid (FA) is a steroid antibiotic commonly used against Gram positive bacterial infections. It inhibits protein synthesis by stalling elongation factor G (EF-G) on the ribosome after translocation. A significant number of the mutations conferring strong FA resistance have been mapped at the interfaces between domains G, III and V of EF-G. However, direct information on how such mutations affect the structure has hitherto not been available. Here we present the crystal structures of two mutants of Thermus thermophilus EF-G, G16V and T84A, which exhibit FA hypersensitivity and resistance in vitro, respectively. These mutants also have higher and lower affinity for GTP respectively than wild-type EF-G. The mutations cause significant conformational changes in the switch II loop that have opposite effects on the position of a key residue, Phe90, which undergoes large conformational changes. This correlates with the importance of Phe90 in FA sensitivity reported in previous studies. These structures substantiate the importance of the domain G/domain III/domain V interfaces as a key component of the FA binding site. The mutations also cause subtle changes in the environment of the "P-loop lysine", Lys25. This led us to examine the conformation of the equivalent residue in all structures of translational GTPases, which revealed that EF-G and eEF2 form a group separate from the others and suggested that the role of Lys25 may be different in the two groups.
9126844	Crystal structure of a maltotetraose-forming exo-amylase from Pseudomonas stutzeri.	The three-dimensional structure of an exo-type alpha-amylase from Pseudomonas stutzeri which degrades starch from its non-reducing end to produce maltotetraose has been determined by X-ray structure analysis. The catalytic domain of this enzyme (G4-2), whose structure was determined, is a product of spontaneous limited proteolysis in culture broth. It has 429 amino acid residues and a molecular mass of 47,200, and crystallizes in ammonium sulfate solution at pH 7.5. The structure was elucidated by the multiple isomorphous replacement method and refined at 2.0 A resolution, resulting in a final R-factor of 0.178 for significant reflections with a root-mean-square deviation from ideality in bond distances of 0.013 A. The polypeptide chain of this molecule folds into three domains; the first with a (beta/alpha)8 barrel structure, the second with an excursed part from the first one, and the third with five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheets. The active cleft is formed on the C-terminal side of the beta-sheets in the (beta/alpha)8 barrel as in the known endo-type alpha-amylases. A histidine side-chain nitrogen ND1 is coordinated to one of the bound calcium ion. The recognition site of the non-reducing end of the amylose that determines exo-wise degradation is presumed to be at one end of this cleft where there is a disordered loop consisting of the 66th to 72nd residues, and a loop carrying an aspartic acid (Asp160). These structural features may be responsible for the binding of the non-reducing end of the substrate amylose.
7820548	Structures of poliovirus complexes with anti-viral drugs: implications for viral stability and drug design.	BACKGROUND: Picornaviruses, such as the structurally related polioviruses and rhinoviruses, are important human pathogens which have been the target of major drug development efforts. Receptor-mediated uncoating and thermal inactivation of poliovirus and rhinovirus are inhibited by agents that bind to each virus by inserting into a pocket in the beta barrel of the viral capsid protein, VP1. This pocket, which is normally empty in human rhinovirus-14 (HRV14), is occupied by an unknown natural ligand in poliovirus. Structural studies of HRV14-drug complexes have shown that drug binding causes large, localized changes in the conformation of VP1. RESULTS: We report the crystal structures of six complexes between poliovirus and capsid-binding, antiviral drugs, including complexes of four different drugs with the Sabin vaccine strain of type 3 poliovirus, and complexes of one of these drugs with two other poliovirus strains that contain sequence differences in the drug-binding site. In each complex, the changes in capsid structure associated with drug binding are limited to minor adjustments in the conformations of a few side chains lining the binding site. CONCLUSIONS: The minor structural changes caused by drug binding suggest a model of drug action in which it is the conformational changes prevented by the bound drug, rather than obvious conformational changes induced by drug binding, which exert the biological effect. Our results, along with additional structures of rhinovirus-drug complexes, suggest possible improvements in drug design, and provide important clues about the nature of the conformational changes that are involved in the uncoating process.
12215417	Structural basis for AMPA receptor activation and ligand selectivity: crystal structures of five agonist complexes with the GluR2 ligand-binding core.	Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter within the mammalian CNS, playing an important role in many different functions in the brain such as learning and memory. In this study, a combination of molecular biology, X-ray structure determinations, as well as electrophysiology and binding experiments, has been used to increase our knowledge concerning the ionotropic glutamate receptor GluR2 at the molecular level. Five high-resolution X-ray structures of the ligand-binding domain of GluR2 (S1S2J) complexed with the three agonists (S)-2-amino-3-[3-hydroxy-5-(2-methyl-2H-tetrazol-5-yl)isoxazol-4-yl]propionic acid (2-Me-Tet-AMPA), (S)-2-amino-3-(3-carboxy-5-methylisoxazol-4-yl)propionic acid (ACPA), and (S)-2-amino-3-(4-bromo-3-hydroxy-isoxazol-5-yl)propionic acid (Br-HIBO), as well as of a mutant thereof (S1S2J-Y702F) in complex with ACPA and Br-HIBO, have been determined. The structures reveal that AMPA agonists with an isoxazole moiety adopt different binding modes in the receptor, dependent on the substituents of the isoxazole. Br-HIBO displays selectivity among different AMPA receptor subunits, and the design and structure determination of the S1S2J-Y702F mutant in complex with Br-HIBO and ACPA have allowed us to explain the molecular mechanism behind this selectivity and to identify key residues for ligand recognition. The agonists induce the same degree of domain closure as AMPA, except for Br-HIBO, which shows a slightly lower degree of domain closure. An excellent correlation between domain closure and efficacy has been obtained from electrophysiology experiments undertaken on non-desensitising GluR2i(Q)-L483Y receptors expressed in oocytes, providing strong evidence that receptor activation occurs as a result of domain closure. The structural results, combined with the functional studies on the full-length receptor, form a powerful platform for the design of new selective agonists.
11509552	Backbone dynamics of plastocyanin in both oxidation states. Solution structure of the reduced form and comparison with the oxidized state.	A model-free analysis based on (15)N R(1), (15)N R(2), and (15)N-(1)H nuclear Overhauser effects was performed on reduced (diamagnetic) and oxidized (paramagnetic) forms of plastocyanin from Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. The protein backbone is rigid, displaying a small degree of mobility in the sub-nanosecond time scale. The loops surrounding the copper ion, involved in physiological electron transfer, feature a higher extent of flexibility in the longer time scale in both redox states, as measured from D(2)O exchange of amide protons and from NH-H(2)O saturation transfer experiments. In contrast to the situation for other electron transfer proteins, no significant difference in the dynamic properties is found between the two redox forms. A solution structure was also determined for the reduced plastocyanin and compared with the solution structure of the oxidized form in order to assess possible structural changes related to the copper ion redox state. Within the attained resolution, the structure of the reduced plastocyanin is indistinguishable from that of the oxidized form, even though small chemical shift differences are observed. The present characterization provides information on both the structural and dynamic behavior of blue copper proteins in solution that is useful to understand further the role(s) of protein dynamics in electron transfer processes.
8069625	NMR analysis of the residual structure in the denatured state of an unusual mutant of staphylococcal nuclease.	BACKGROUND: Staphylococcal nuclease is a well-developed model system for analyzing the effects of mutations on protein folding and stability. Substitution of glycine 88 with valine (Gly88Val) destabilizes staphylococcal nuclease by 1.0 kcal mole-1 and reduces its sensitivity to the denaturant guanidine hydrochloride, a phenomenon which may indicate an increase in residual structure in the denatured state. To assess its effects on denatured state structure, the Gly88Val mutation was incorporated into a 136 residue nonsense fragment which has been developed as a model of the wild type denatured state. RESULTS: Application of two- and three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy to the Gly88Val fragment uniformly labeled with 15N and 13C has led to the assignment of 93 of the 136 residues. Comparison of chemical shifts of backbone resonances to those of wild type native nuclease, analysis of the secondary shifts of the assigned resonances and nuclear Overhauser effects involving backbone protons indicate that, unlike the wild type fragment, most if not all of the five-stranded beta-barrel structure persists in this denatured state. CONCLUSION: One major effect of the Gly88Val mutation is to perturb the cooperative breakdown of the folded conformation, leading to a denatured state which is both more ordered and more stable than that formed by the wild type sequence. Since the equilibrium between the native and denatured states depends on the free energy difference between them, stabilization of the denatured state by the Gly88Val mutation indirectly destabilizes the native state.
2553983	Crystal structure of the p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase-substrate complex refined at 1.9 A resolution. Analysis of the enzyme-substrate and enzyme-product complexes.	Using synchrotron radiation, the X-ray diffraction intensities of crystals of p-hydroxy-benzoate hydroxylase, complexed with the substrate p-hydroxybenzoate, were measured to a resolution of 1.9 A. Restrained least-squares refinement alternated with rebuilding in electron density maps yielded an atom model of the enzyme-substrate complex with a crystallographic R-factor of 15.6% for 31,148 reflections between 6.0 and 1.9 A. A total of 330 solvent molecules was located. In the final model, only three residues have deviating phi-psi angle combinations. One of them, the active site residue Arg44, has a well-defined electron density and may be strained to adopt this conformation for efficient catalysis. The mode of binding of FAD is distinctly different for the different components of the coenzyme. The adenine ring is engaged in three water-mediated hydrogen bonds with the protein, while making only one direct hydrogen bond with the enzyme. The pyrophosphate moiety makes five water-mediated versus three direct hydrogen bonds. The ribityl and ribose moieties make only direct hydrogen bonds, in all cases, except one, with side-chain atoms. The isoalloxazine ring also makes only direct hydrogen bonds, but virtually only with main-chain atoms. The conformation of FAD in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is strikingly similar to that in glutathione reductase, while the riboflavin-binding parts of these two enzymes have no structural similarity at all. The refined 1.9 A structure of the p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase-substrate complex was the basis of further refinement of the 2.3 A structure of the enzyme-product complex. The result was a final R-factor of 16.7% for 14,339 reflections between 6.0 and 2.3 A and an improved geometry. Comparison between the complexes indicated only small differences in the active site region, where the product molecule is rotated by 14 degrees compared with the substrate in the enzyme-substrate complex. During the refinements of the enzyme-substrate and enzyme-product complexes, the flavin ring was allowed to bend or twist by imposing planarity restraints on the benzene and pyrimidine ring, but not on the flavin ring as a whole. The observed angle between the benzene ring and the pyrimidine ring was 10 degrees for the enzyme-substrate complex and 19 degrees for the enzyme-product complex. Because of the high temperature factors of the flavin ring in the enzyme-product complex, the latter value should be treated with caution. Six out of eight peptide residues near the flavin ring are oriented with their nitrogen atom pointing towards the ring.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
9405053	Active site of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A from Lactococcus lactis investigated by chemical modification and mutagenesis.	The flavin-containing enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHOD) catalyzes the oxidation of dihydroorotate (DHO) to orotate, the first aromatic intermediate in pyrimidine biosynthesis. The first structure of a DHOD, the A form of the enzyme from Lactococcus lactis, has recently become known, and some conserved residues were suggested to have a role in the active site [Rowland et al. (1997) Structure 2, 239-252]. In particular, Cys 130 was hypothesized to work as a base, which activates dihydroorotate (DHO) for hydride transfer. By chemical modification and site-directed mutagenesis we have obtained results consistent with this proposal. Cys 130 was susceptible to alkylating reagents, and mutants of Cys 130 (C130A and C130S) showed hardly detectable enzyme activity at pH 8.0, while at pH 10 the C130S mutant enzyme had approximately 1% of wild-type activity. Mutants of Lys 43, Asn 132, and Lys 164 were also constructed. Exchange of Lys 43 to Ala or Glu (K43A and K43E) and of Asn 132 to Ala (N132A) affected both catalysis and substrate binding. Expressed as kcat/KM for DHO, the deterioration of these three mutant enzymes was 10(3)-10(4)-fold. Flavin spectra of the mutant enzymes were not, like the wild-type enzyme, bleached by DHO in stopped-flow experiments, showing that they were deficient with respect to the first half-reaction, namely reduction of FMN by DHO, which was not rate limiting for the wild-type enzyme. The binding interaction between flavin and the reaction product, orotate, could be monitored by a red shift of the flavin absorbance in the wild-type enzyme. The C130A, C130S, and N132A mutant enzymes displayed similar capacity to bind orotate. In contrast, orotate did not change the absorption spectra of the K43 mutant enzymes, although it did inhibit their activity. All of the mutant enzymes, except K164A, contained normal levels of flavin. The results are discussed in relation to the structures of DHODA and other flavoenzymes. The possible acid-base chemistry of Cys 130 is compared to previous work on mammalian dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenases, flavoenzymes, which catalyze the reversed reaction, namely the reduction of pyrimidine bases.
6049071	Three-dimensional structure of tosyl-alpha-chymotrypsin.	null
16222336	Nup50/Npap60 function in nuclear protein import complex disassembly and importin recycling.	Nuclear import of proteins containing classical nuclear localization signals (NLS) is mediated by the importin-alpha:beta complex that binds cargo in the cytoplasm and facilitates its passage through nuclear pores, after which nuclear RanGTP dissociates the import complex and the importins are recycled. In vertebrates, import is stimulated by nucleoporin Nup50, which has been proposed to accompany the import complex through nuclear pores. However, we show here that the Nup50 N-terminal domain actively displaces NLSs from importin-alpha, which would be more consistent with Nup50 functioning to coordinate import complex disassembly and importin recycling. The crystal structure of the importin-alpha:Nup50 complex shows that Nup50 binds at two sites on importin-alpha. One site overlaps the secondary NLS-binding site, whereas the second extends along the importin-alpha C-terminus. Mutagenesis indicates that interaction at both sites is required for Nup50 to displace NLSs. The Cse1p:Kap60p:RanGTP complex structure suggests how Nup50 is then displaced on formation of the importin-alpha export complex. These results provide a rationale for understanding the series of interactions that orchestrate the terminal steps of nuclear protein import.
9237914	Three-dimensional structure of the DNA-binding domain of the fructose repressor from Escherichia coli by 1H and 15N NMR.	FruR is an Escherichia coli transcriptional regulator that belongs to the LacI DNA-binding protein family. By using 1H and 15N NMR spectroscopy, we have determined the three-dimensional solution structure of the FruR N-terminal DNA-binding domain consisting of 57 amino acid residues. A total of 809 NMR-derived distances and 54 dihedral angle constraints have been used for molecular modelling with the X-PLOR program. The resulting set of calculated structures presents an average root-mean-square deviation of 0.37 A at the main-chain level for the first 47 residues. This highly defined N-terminal part of the structure reveals a similar topology for the three alpha-helices when compared to the 3D structures of LacI and PurR counterparts. The most striking difference lies in the connection between helix II and helix III, in which three additional residues are present in FruR. This connecting segment is well structured and contains a type III turn. Apart from hydrophobic interactions of non-polar residues with the core of the domain, this connecting segment is stabilised by several hydrogen bonds and by the aromatic ring stacking between Tyr19 of helix II and Tyr28 of the turn. The region containing the putative "hinge helix" (helix IV), that has been described in PurR-DNA complex to make specific base contacts in the minor groove of DNA, is unfolded. Examination of hydrogen bonds highlights the importance of homologous residues that seem to be conserved for their ability to fulfill helix N and C-capping roles in the LacI repressor family.
11562168	Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of human transglutaminase 3 from zymogen to active form.	Transglutaminases(TGases; protein-glutamine-glutamyl-transferases) are a large family of calcium-dependent acyl-transfer enzymes that catalyze the formation of covalent cross links in proteins. Of these, the "epidermal" or "hair follicle" TGase 3 isoform is critically involved in barrier formation in epithelia. It is a zymogen, requiring proteolytic activation to achieve maximal specific activity. In order to understand its structure and function, we have devised methods for the rapid large-scale expression of the TGase 3 zymogen in the baculovirus system, and here we describe the purification of the zymogen and activated forms. We describe methods for the formation of high-quality, well-diffracting crystals within 3-5 days, using both dioxane and beta-octylglucoside to overcome severe twinning problems. The crystal of the zymogen belongs to the triclinic space group P1 and diffracts to 2.2-A resolution, and the crystal of the active form belongs to the P2(1) space group at 2.7-A resolution.
9917143	Assignment of 1H, 13C and 15N signals of the inhibitor protein Im9 bound to the DNase domain of colicin E9.	null
8663370	Thermal stability of hexameric and tetrameric nucleoside diphosphate kinases. Effect of subunit interaction.	The eukaryotic nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) kinases are hexamers, while the bacterial NDP kinases are tetramers made of small, single domain subunits. These enzymes represent an ideal model for studying the effect of subunit interaction on protein stability. The thermostability of NDP kinases of each class was studied by differential scanning calorimetry and biochemical methods. The hexameric NDP kinase from Dictyostelium discoideum displays one single, irreversible differential scanning calorimetry peak (Tm 62 degrees C) over a broad protein concentration, indicating a single step denaturation. The thermal stability of the protein was increased by ADP. The P105G substitution, which affects a loop implicated in subunit contacts, yields a protein that reversibly dissociates to folded monomers at 38 degrees C before the irreversible denaturation occurs (Tm 47 degrees C). ADP delays the dissociation, but does not change the Tm. These data indicate a "coupling" of the quaternary structure with the tertiary structure in the wild-type, but not in the mutated protein. We describe the x-ray structure of the P105G mutant at 2.2-A resolution. It is very similar to that of the wild-type protein. Therefore, a minimal change in the structure leads to a dramatic change of protein thermostability. The NDP kinase from Escherichia coli behaves like the P105G mutant of the Dictyostelium NDP kinase. The detailed study of their thermostability is important, since biological effects of thermolabile NDP kinases have been described in several organisms.
8250907	Force-generating domain of myosin motor.	To understand the underlying mechanism of force generation by myosin motor, it is crucial to know which part of the molecule is essential for the process. Recent structure determination of myosin motor domain at atomic resolution has revealed that the domain comprises two smaller domains, the "ATPase domain" consisting of only an N-terminal segment of the heavy chain and the "neck domain" consisting of a long alpha-helix of the heavy chain and two light chains. This atomic structure begs the question of whether both domains are required for force generation. To answer it, we genetically truncated the head to generate a recombinant fragment composed of the "ATPase domain" alone. The truncated head drove sliding movement of actin filaments and generated force in a novel in vitro assay system, which allows us to hold a specific site of the head on a glass surface. These results indicate that the compact ATPase domain functions as a force-generating machinery of the myosin motor.
8070396	The crystal structure of elongation factor G complexed with GDP, at 2.7 A resolution.	Elongation factor G (EF-G) catalyzes the translocation step of protein synthesis in bacteria, and like the other bacterial elongation factor, EF-Tu--whose structure is already known--it is a member of the GTPase superfamily. We have determined the crystal structure of EF-G--GDP from Thermus thermophilus. It is an elongated molecule whose large, N-terminal domain resembles the G domain of EF-Tu, except for a 90 residue insert, which covers a surface that is involved in nucleotide exchange in EF-Tu and other G proteins. The tertiary structures of the second domains of EF-G and EF-Tu are nearly identical, but the relative placement of the first two domains in EF-G--GDP resembles that seen in EF-Tu--GTP, not EF-Tu--GDP. The remaining three domains of EF-G look like RNA binding domains, and have no counterparts in EF-Tu.
10828980	Crystal structure and iron-binding properties of the R210K mutant of the N-lobe of human lactoferrin: implications for iron release from transferrins.	Lactoferrin (Lf) and serum transferrin (Tf) combine high-affinity iron binding with an ability to release this iron at reduced pH. Lf, however, retains iron to significantly lower pH than Tf, giving the two proteins distinct functional roles. In this paper, we compared the iron-release profiles for human Lf, Tf, and their N-lobe half-molecules Lf(N) and Tf(N) and showed that half of the difference in iron retention at low pH ( approximately 1.3 pH units) results from interlobe interactions in Lf. To probe factors intrinsic to the N-lobes, we further examined the specific role of two basic residues that are proposed to form a pH-sensitive dilysine trigger for iron release in the N-lobe of Tf [Dewan, J. C., Mikami, B., Hirose, M., and Sacchettini, J. C. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 11963-11968] by mutating Arg 210 to Lys in the N-lobe half-molecule Lf(N). The R210K mutant was expressed, purified, and crystallized, and its crystal structure was determined and refined at 2.0-A resolution to a final R factor (R(free)) of 19.8% (25.0%). The structure showed that Lys 210 and Lys 301 in R210K do not form a dilysine interaction like that between Lys 206 and Lys 296 in human Tf. The R210K mutant retained iron to lower pH than Tf(N), consistent with the absence of the dilysine interaction but released iron at approximately 0.7 pH units higher than Lf(N). We conclude that (i) the ability of Lf to retain iron to significantly lower pH than Tf is due equally to interlobe interactions and to the absence in Lfs of an interaction analogous to the dilysine pair in Tfs, even when two lysines are present at the corresponding sequence positions, and (ii) an appropriately positioned basic residue (Arg 210 in human Lf) modulates iron release by inhibiting protonation of the N-lobe iron ligands, specifically His 253.
15299710	Refined crystal structure of the catalytic domain of xylanase A from Pseudomonas fluorescens at 1.8 A resolution.	The three-dimensional structure of native xylanase A from Pseudomonas flouorescens subspecies cellulosa has been refined at 1.8 A resolution. The space group is P2(1)2(1)2(1) with four molecules in the asymmetric unit. The final model has an R factor of 0.166 for 103 749 reflections with the four molecules refined independently. The tertiary structure consists of an eightfold beta/alpha-barrel, the so-called TIM-barrel fold. The active site is in an open cleft at the carboxy-terminal end of the beta/alpha-barrel, and the active-site residues are a pair of glutamates, Glu127 on strand 4 and Glu246 on strand 7. Both these catalytic glutamate residues are found on beta-bulges. An atypically long loop after strand 7 is stabilized by calcium. Unusual features include a non-proline cis-peptide residue Ala80 which is found on a beta-bulge at the end of beta-strand 3. The three beta-bulge type distortions occurring on beta-strands 3, 4 and 7 are functionally significant as they serve to orient important active-site residues. The active-site residues are further held in place by an extensive hydrogen-bonding network of active-site residues in the catalytic site of xylanase A. A chain of well ordered water molecules occupies the substrate-binding cleft, some or all of which are expelled on binding of the substrate.
12730686	Structural insights into the catalytic mechanism of cyclophilin A.	Cyclophilins constitute a ubiquitous protein family whose functions include protein folding, transport and signaling. They possess both sequence-specific binding and proline cis-trans isomerase activities, as exemplified by the interaction between cyclophilin A (CypA) and the HIV-1 CA protein. Here, we report crystal structures of CypA in complex with HIV-1 CA protein variants that bind preferentially with the substrate proline residue in either the cis or the trans conformation. Cis- and trans-Pro substrates are accommodated within the enzyme active site by rearrangement of their N-terminal residues and with minimal distortions in the path of the main chain. CypA Arg55 guanidinium group probably facilitates catalysis by anchoring the substrate proline oxygen and stabilizing sp3 hybridization of the proline nitrogen in the transition state.
12144516	The importance of CH/pi interactions to the function of carbohydrate binding proteins.	It is suggested that the interactions between the hydrophobic C-H groups of carbohydrate residues and the pi-electron systems of aromatic amino-acid residues play an important role in the ligand-recognition function of carbohydrate-binding proteins. This review focuses on our recent structural and functional studies of human lysozyme and hevein-domain type lectins (wheat-germ agglutinin and Ac-AMP2) aimed at understanding how CH/pi interactions are involved in the actual binding events.
14568540	Structural consequences of accommodation of four non-cognate amino acid residues in the S1 pocket of bovine trypsin and chymotrypsin.	Crystal structures of P1 Gly, Val, Leu and Phe bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) variants in complex with two serine proteinases, bovine trypsin and chymotrypsin, have been determined. The association constants for the four mutants with the two enzymes show that the enlargement of the volume of the P1 residue is accompanied by an increase of the binding energy, which is more pronounced for bovine chymotrypsin. Since the conformation of the P1 side-chains in the two S1 pockets is very similar, we suggest that the difference in DeltaG values between the enzymes must arise from the more polar environment of the S1 site of trypsin. This results mainly from the substitutions of Met192 and Ser189 observed in chymotrypsin with Gln192 and Asp189 present in trypsin. The more polar interior of the S1 site of trypsin is reflected by a much higher order of the solvent network in the empty pocket of the enzyme, as is observed in the complexes of the two enzymes with the P1 Gly BPTI variant. The more optimal binding of the large hydrophobic P1 residues by chymotrypsin is also reflected by shrinkage of the S1 pocket upon the accommodation of the cognate residues of this enzyme. Conversely, the S1 pocket of trypsin expands upon binding of such side-chains, possibly to avoid interaction with the polar residues of the walls. Further differentiation between the two enzymes is achieved by small differences in the shape of the S1 sites, resulting in an unequal steric hindrance of some of the side-chains, as observed for the gamma-branched P1 Leu variant of BPTI, which is much more favored by bovine chymotrypsin than trypsin. Analysis of the discrimination of beta-branched residues by trypsin and chymotrypsin is based on the complexes with the P1 Val BPTI variant. Steric repulsion of the P1 Val residue by the walls of the S1 pocket of both enzymes prevents the P1 Val side-chain from adopting the most optimal chi1 value.
12649440	Intermolecular ion pairs maintain the toroidal structure of Pyrococcus furiosus PCNA.	Two mutant proliferating cell nuclear antigens from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus, PfuPCNA(D143A) and PfuPCNA(D143A/D147A), were prepared by site-specific mutagenesis. The results from gel filtration showed that mutations at D143 and D147 drastically affect the stability of the trimeric structure of PfuPCNA. The PfuPCNA(D143A) still retained the activity to stimulate the DNA polymerase reaction, but PfuPCNA(D143A/D147A) lost the activity. Crystal structures of the mutant PfuPCNAs were determined. Although the wild-type PCNA forms a toroidal trimer with intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the N- and C-terminal domains, the mutant PfuPCNAs exist as V-shaped dimers through intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the two C-terminal domains in the crystal. Because the mutated residues are involved in the intermolecular ion pairs through their side chains in the wild-type PfuPCNA, these ion pairs seem to play a key role in maintaining the toroidal structure of the PfuPCNA trimer. The comparison of the crystal structures revealed intriguing conformational flexibility of each domain in the PfuPCNA subunit. This structural versatility of PCNA may be involved in the mechanisms for ring opening and closing.
16271889	Bovine mitochondrial peroxiredoxin III forms a two-ring catenane.	A crystal structure is reported for the C168S mutant of a typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxin III (Prx III) from bovine mitochondria at a resolution of 3.3 A. Prx III is present as a two-ring catenane comprising two interlocking dodecameric toroids that are assembled from basic dimeric units. Each ring has an external diameter of 150 A and encompasses a central cavity that is 70 A in width. The concatenated dodecamers are inclined at an angle of 55 degrees, which provides a large contact surface between the rings. Dimer-dimer contacts involved in toroid formation are hydrophobic in nature, whereas the 12 areas of contact between interlocked rings arise from polar interactions. These two major modes of subunit interaction provide important insights into possible mechanisms of catenane formation.
2463371	Mutations that alter the pore function of the OmpF porin of Escherichia coli K12.	We describe the isolation and characterization of mutations in ompF that alter the pore properties of the OmpF porin. The selection makes use of the fact that maltodextrins larger than maltotriose are too large to diffuse through the normal OmpF pore. By demanding growth on maltodextrins (Dex+) in the absence of the LamB protein, which is normally required for the uptake of these large sugars, we are able to obtain ompF mutations. These include transversions, transitions and small deletions. We obtained almost exclusively ompF mutations in spite of the fact that analogous alterations in ompC can result in similar phenotypes. Fifteen independent point mutations identify residues R42, R82, D113 and R132 of the mature peptide as important in pore function. The alterations result in uncharged amino acids being substituted for charged amino acids. Growth tests, antibiotic sensitivities and rates of [14C]maltose uptake suggest that the alterations result in an increased pore size. Small deletions of six to 15 amino acid residues in the region between A108 and V133 of mature OmpF dramatically alter outer membrane permeability to hydrophobic antibiotics and detergents as well as conferring a Dex+ phenotype. We suggest that these mutations affect both the pore function and interactions with other outer membrane components. A model of OmpF protein structure based on general rules for folding membrane proteins and these mutations is presented.
1259752	A new plot for allosteric phenomena.	null
8176740	Solvent rearrangement in an antigen-antibody interface introduced by site-directed mutagenesis of the antibody combining site.	The three-dimensional structure of a site-directed mutant of the bacterially expressed Fv fragment from monoclonal antibody D1.3, complexed to the specific antigen lysozyme has been determined to a nominal resolution of 1.8 A using X-ray diffraction data. The replacement of VL Trp92 by Asp allows two water molecules to occupy space taken by Trp92 in the wild-type complex, in agreement with a previous observation that water molecules play an important role in stabilizing this antigen-antibody complex. The equilibrium constant for the binding of the mutant Fv to the antigen decreases by three orders of magnitude (from 2.3 x 10(8) M-1 to 2.6 x 10(5) M-1). Titration calorimetry shows that this results from a smaller negative binding enthalpy (delta delta H = -16 kJ mol-1 at 24 degrees C), whereas the value of the binding entropy is not affected. Since in the complex between the mutated Fv and antigen the buried area has decreased relative to that of the wild-type Fv by about 150 A2, the contribution of the buried unit area to the decrease in free energy (delta Gzero) is approximately 117 J mol-1 (28 cal mol-1) per A2. The loss of interatomic contacts in replacing Trp by Asp permits an approximate calculation for the contribution of van der Waals interactions made by Trp92 in this complex, which gives an average of 2.1 kJ mol-1 (0.5 kcal mol-1) for contacts between carbon atoms.
6414511	Structure of the complex of Streptomyces griseus protease B and the third domain of the turkey ovomucoid inhibitor at 1.8-A resolution.	The structure of the complex between the serine protease Streptomyces griseus protease B (SGPB) and the third domain of the Kazal-type ovomucoid inhibitor from turkey has been solved at 1.8-A resolution and refined to a conventional R factor of 0.125. As others have reported previously for analogous complexes of proteases and protein inhibitors, the inhibitor binds in a fashion similar to that of a substrate; it is not cleaved, but there is a close approach (2.7 A) of the active site nucleophile Ser-195 O gamma to the carbonyl carbon of the reactive peptide bond of the inhibitor. Contrary to the structural reports regarding the other enzyme-inhibitor complexes, we conclude that there is no evidence for a significant distortion of this peptide bond from planarity. The mechanism of inhibition can be understood in terms of the equilibrium thermodynamic parameters Ka, the enzyme-inhibitor association constant, and Khyd, the equilibrium constant for inhibitor hydrolysis. These thermodynamic parameters can be rationalized in terms of the observed structure.
9145102	Specific protein recognition of an mRNA cap through its alkylated base.	The specific binding of N7-methylguanine cap analogues to the RNA methyltransferase VP39 was observed through X-ray crystallography, providing a prototypical structure for a complex between a protein and an mRNA 5' cap.
9655825	Drug design against a shifting target: a structural basis for resistance to inhibitors in a variant of influenza virus neuraminidase.	BACKGROUND: Inhibitors of the influenza virus neuraminidase have been shown to be effective antiviral agents in humans. Several studies have reported the selection of novel influenza strains when the virus is cultured with neuraminidase inhibitors in vitro. These resistant viruses have mutations either in the neuraminidase or in the viral haemagglutinin. Inhibitors in which the glycerol sidechain at position 6 of 2-deoxy-2,3-dehydro-N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac2en) has been replaced by carboxamide-linked hydrophobic substituents have recently been reported and shown to select neuraminidase variants. This study seeks to clarify the structural and functional consequences of replacing the glycerol sidechain of the inhibitor with other chemical constituents. RESULTS: The neuraminidase variant Arg292-->Lys is modified in one of three arginine residues that encircle the carboxylate group of the substrate. The structure of this variant in complex with the carboxamide inhibitor used for its selection, and with other Neu5Ac2en analogues, is reported here at high resolution. The structural consequences of the mutation correlate with altered inhibitory activity of the compounds compared with wild-type neuraminidase. CONCLUSIONS: The Arg292-->Lys variant of influenza neuraminidase affects the binding of substrate by modification of the interaction with the substrate carboxylate. This may be one of the structural correlates of the reduced enzyme activity of the variant. Inhibitors that have replacements for the glycerol at position 6 are further affected in the Arg292-->Lys variant because of structural changes in the binding site that apparently raise the energy barrier for the conformational change in the enzyme required to accommodate such inhibitors. These results provide evidence that a general strategy for drug design when the target has a high mutation frequency is to design the inhibitor to be as closely related as possible to the natural ligands of the target.
10970744	Crystal structures of mouse class II alcohol dehydrogenase reveal determinants of substrate specificity and catalytic efficiency.	The structure of mouse class II alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH2) has been determined in a binary complex with the coenzyme NADH and in a ternary complex with both NADH and the inhibitor N-cyclohexylformamide to 2.2 A and 2.1 A resolution, respectively. The ADH2 dimer is asymmetric in the crystal with different orientations of the catalytic domains relative to the coenzyme-binding domains in the two subunits, resulting in a slightly different closure of the active-site cleft. Both conformations are about half way between the open apo structure and the closed holo structure of horse ADH1, thus resembling that of ADH3. The semi-open conformation and structural differences around the active-site cleft contribute to a substantially different substrate-binding pocket architecture as compared to other classes of alcohol dehydrogenase, and provide the structural basis for recognition and selectivity of alcohols and quinones. The active-site cleft is more voluminous than that of ADH1 but not as open and funnel-shaped as that of ADH3. The loop with residues 296-301 from the coenzyme-binding domain is short, thus opening up the pocket towards the coenzyme. On the opposite side, the loop with residues 114-121 stretches out over the inter-domain cleft. A cavity is formed below this loop and adds an appendix to the substrate-binding pocket. Asp301 is positioned at the entrance of the pocket and may control the binding of omega-hydroxy fatty acids, which act as inhibitors rather than substrates. Mouse ADH2 is known as an inefficient ADH with a slow hydrogen-transfer step. By replacing Pro47 with His, the alcohol dehydrogenase activity is restored. Here, the structure of this P47H mutant was determined in complex with NADH to 2.5 A resolution. His47 is suitably positioned to act as a catalytic base in the deprotonation of the substrate. Moreover, in the more closed subunit, the coenzyme is allowed a position closer to the catalytic zinc. This is consistent with hydrogen transfer from an alcoholate intermediate where the Pro/His replacement focuses on the function of the enzyme.
11148047	Amino acid residues in ribonuclease MC1 from bitter gourd seeds which are essential for uridine specificity.	The ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1), isolated from seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia), consists of 190 amino acids and is characterized by specific cleavage at the 5'-side of uridine. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to evaluate the contribution of four amino acids, Asn71, Val72, Leu73, and Arg74, at the alpha4-alpha5 loop between alpha4 and alpha5 helices for recognition of uracil base by RNase MC1. Four mutants, N71T, V72L, L73A, and R74S, in which Asn71, Val72, Leu73, and Arg74 in RNase MC1 were substituted for the corresponding amino acids, Thr, Leu, Ala, and Ser, respectively, in a guanylic acid preferential RNase NW from Nicotiana glutinosa, were prepared and characterized with respect to enzymatic activity. Kinetic analysis with a dinucleoside monophosphate, CpU, showed that the mutant N71T exhibited 7.0-fold increased K(m) and 2.3-fold decreased k(cat), while the mutant L73A had 14.4-fold increased K(m), although it did retain the k(cat) value comparable to that of the wild-type. In contrast, replacements of Val72 and Arg74 by the corresponding amino acids Leu and Ser, respectively, had little effect on the enzymatic activity. This observation is consistent with findings in the crystal structure analysis that Asn71 and Leu73 are responsible for a uridine specificity for RNase MC1. The role of Asn71 in enzymatic reaction of RNase MC1 was further investigated by substituting amino acids Ala, Ser, Gln, and Asp. Our observations suggest that Asn71 has at least two roles: one is base recognition by hydrogen bonding, and the other is to stabilize the conformation of the alpha4-alpha5 loop by hydrogen bonding to the peptide backbone, events which possibly result in an appropriate orientation of the alpha-helix (alpha5) containing active site residues. Mutants N71T and N71S showed a remarkable shift from uracil to guanine specificity, as evaluated by cleavage of CpG, although they did exhibit uridine specificity against yeast RNA and homopolynucleotides.
8434007	Crystal structure of Escherichia coli L-asparaginase, an enzyme used in cancer therapy.	The crystal structure of Escherichia coli asparaginase II (EC 3.5.1.1), a drug (Elspar) used for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia, has been determined at 2.3 A resolution by using data from a single heavy atom derivative in combination with molecular replacement. The atomic model was refined to an R factor of 0.143. This enzyme, active as a homotetramer with 222 symmetry, belongs to the class of alpha/beta proteins. Each subunit has two domains with unique topological features. On the basis of present structural evidence consistent with previous biochemical studies, we propose locations for the active sites between the N- and C-terminal domains belonging to different subunits and postulate a catalytic role for Thr-89.
9466928	The effects of steric mutations on the structure of type III antifreeze protein and its interaction with ice.	The interaction of proteins with ice is poorly understood and difficult to study, partly because ice is transitory and can present many binding surfaces, and partly because structures have been determined for only two ice-binding proteins. This paper focuses on one of these, a 66-residue antifreeze protein (AFP) from eel pout. The high resolution X-ray structure of this fish AFP demonstrated that the proposed ice-binding surface is remarkably flat for such a small protein. The residues on the planar surface thought to be involved in ice binding are restrained by hydrogen bonds or by tight packing of their side-chains. To probe the requirement for a flat binding surface, a conserved alanine in the center of the AFP planar surface was substituted with larger residues. Six alanine replacement mutants (Ala16 > Cys, Thr, Met, Arg, His and Tyr), designed to disrupt the planarity of the surface and sterically block binding to ice, were characterized by X-ray crystallography and compared with the wild-type AFP. In each case, the detail provided by these crystal structures has helped explain the effects of the mutation on antifreeze activity. The substitutions, Ala16 > His and Ala16 > Tyr, were large enough to shield Gln44, one of the putative ice-binding residues, contributing to their very low thermal hysteresis activity. In addition to sterically hindering the putative ice-binding site, the bulkier residues also caused shifts in the putative ice-binding residues owing to the tight packing of side-chains on the planar surface. This unexpected consequence of the mutations helps account for the severely reduced antifreeze activity. One explanation for residual antifreeze activity in some of the mutants lies in the possibility that AFPs have a role in shaping the site on the ice to which they bind. Thus, side-chain dislocations might be partially accommodated by ice that can freeze around them. It is evident that the disruption of the planarity, by introducing larger residues at the center of the proposed ice-binding site, is not the only factor responsible for the loss of antifreeze activity. There are multiple causes including positional change and steric blockage of some putative ice-binding residues.
1881877	1.59 A structure of trypsin at 120 K: comparison of low temperature and room temperature structures.	The structure of a rat trypsin mutant [S195C] at a temperature of 120 K has been refined to a crystallographic R factor of 17.4% between 12.0 and 1.59 A and is compared with the structure of the D102N mutant at 295 K. A reduction in the unit cell dimensions in going from room temperature to low temperature is accompanied by a decrease in molecular surface area and radius of gyration. The overall structure remains similar to that at room temperature. The attainable resolution appears to be improved due to the decrease in the fall off of intensities with resolution [reduction of the temperature factor]. This decreases the uncertainty in the atomic positions and allows the localization of more protein atoms and solvent molecules in the low temperature map. The largest differences between the two models occur at residues with higher than average temperature factors. Several features can be localized in the solvent region of the 120 K map that are not seen in the 295 K map. These include several more water molecules as well as an interstitial sulfate ion and two interstitial benzamidine molecules.
15210687	Structural insights into the Thermus thermophilus ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase mechanism via crystal structures with the bound substrate and metal.	ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase (ADPRase) catalyzes the divalent metal ion-dependent hydrolysis of ADP-ribose to ribose 5'-phosphate and AMP. This enzyme plays a key role in regulating the intracellular ADP-ribose levels, and prevents nonenzymatic ADP-ribosylation. To elucidate the pyrophosphatase hydrolysis mechanism employed by this enzyme, structural changes occurring on binding of substrate, metal and product were investigated using crystal structures of ADPRase from an extreme thermophile, Thermus thermophilus HB8. Seven structures were determined, including that of the free enzyme, the Zn(2+)-bound enzyme, the binary complex with ADP-ribose, the ternary complexes with ADP-ribose and Zn(2+) or Gd(3+), and the product complexes with AMP and Mg(2+) or with ribose 5'-phosphate and Zn(2+). The structural and functional studies suggested that the ADP-ribose hydrolysis pathway consists of four reaction states: bound with metal (I), metal and substrate (II), metal and substrate in the transition state (III), and products (IV). In reaction state II, Glu-82 and Glu-70 abstract a proton from a water molecule. This water molecule is situated at an ideal position to carry out nucleophilic attack on the adenosyl phosphate, as it is 3.6 A away from the target phosphorus and almost in line with the scissile bond.
8259514	The role of backbone flexibility in the accommodation of variants that repack the core of T4 lysozyme.	To understand better how the packing of side chains within the core influences protein structure and stability, the crystal structures were determined for eight variants of T4 lysozyme, each of which contains three to five substitutions at adjacent interior sites. Concerted main-chain and side-chain displacements, with movements of helical segments as large as 0.8 angstrom, were observed. In contrast, the angular conformations of the mutated side chains tended to remain unchanged, with torsion angles within 20 degrees of those in the wild-type structure. These observations suggest that not only the rotation of side chains but also movements of the main chain must be considered in the evaluation of which amino acid sequences are compatible with a given protein fold.
16403639	Mechanism of the Class I KDPG aldolase.	In vivo, 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG) aldolase catalyzes the reversible, stereospecific retro-aldol cleavage of KDPG to pyruvate and d-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The enzyme is a lysine-dependent (Class I) aldolase that functions through the intermediacy of a Schiff base. Here, we propose a mechanism for this enzyme based on crystallographic studies of wild-type and mutant aldolases. The three dimensional structure of KDPG aldolase from the thermophile Thermotoga maritima was determined to 1.9A. The structure is the standard alpha/beta barrel observed for all Class I aldolases. At the active site Lys we observe clear density for a pyruvate Schiff base. Density for a sulfate ion bound in a conserved cluster of residues close to the Schiff base is also observed. We have also determined the structure of a mutant of Escherichia coli KDPG aldolase in which the proposed general acid/base catalyst has been removed (E45N). One subunit of the trimer contains density suggesting a trapped pyruvate carbinolamine intermediate. All three subunits contain a phosphate ion bound in a location effectively identical to that of the sulfate ion bound in the T. maritima enzyme. The sulfate and phosphate ions experimentally locate the putative phosphate binding site of the aldolase and, together with the position of the bound pyruvate, facilitate construction of a model for the full-length KDPG substrate complex. The model requires only minimal positional adjustments of the experimentally determined covalent intermediate and bound anion to accommodate full-length substrate. The model identifies the key catalytic residues of the protein and suggests important roles for two observable water molecules. The first water molecule remains bound to the enzyme during the entire catalytic cycle, shuttling protons between the catalytic glutamate and the substrate. The second water molecule arises from dehydration of the carbinolamine and serves as the nucleophilic water during hydrolysis of the enzyme-product Schiff base. The second water molecule may also mediate the base-catalyzed enolization required to form the carbon nucleophile, again bridging to the catalytic glutamate. Many aspects of this mechanism are observed in other Class I aldolases and suggest a mechanistically and, perhaps, evolutionarily related family of aldolases distinct from the N-acetylneuraminate lyase (NAL) family.
9002524	Structure of the conserved GTPase domain of the signal recognition particle.	The signal-recognition particle (SRP) and its receptor (SR) function in the co-translational targeting of nascent protein-ribosome complexes to the membrane translocation apparatus. The SRP protein subunit (termed Ffh in bacteria) that recognizes the signal sequence of nascent polypeptides is a GTPase, as is the SR-alpha subunit (termed FtsY). Ffh and FtsY interact directly, each stimulating the GTP hydrolysis activity of the other. The sequence of Ffh suggests three domains: an amino-terminal N domain of unknown function, a central GTPase G domain, and a methionine-rich M domain that binds both SRP RNA and signal peptides. Sequence conservation suggests that structurally similar N and G domains are present in FtsY. Here we report the structure of the nucleotide-free form of the NG fragment of Ffh. Consistent with a role for apo Ffh in protein targeting, the side chains of the empty active-site pocket form a tight network of interactions which may stabilize the nucleotide-free protein. The structural relationship between the two domains suggests that the N domain senses or controls the nucleotide occupancy of the GTPase domain. A structural subdomain unique to these evolutionarily conserved GTPases constitutes them as a distinct subfamily in the GTPase superfamily.
11827517	X-ray crystal structures of D100E trichodiene synthase and its pyrophosphate complex reveal the basis for terpene product diversity.	The 2.4 A resolution X-ray crystal structure of D100E trichodiene synthase and the 2.6 A resolution structure of its complex with inorganic pyrophosphate are reported. The D100E amino acid substitution in the so-called "aspartate-rich" motif does not result in large changes to the overall structure of the enzyme. In the pyrophosphate complex, however, pyrophosphate coordinates two Mg(2+) ions at the mouth of the active site without causing large changes in the structure of the enzyme. This contrasts with pyrophosphate binding in the wild-type enzyme, where pyrophosphate coordinates three Mg(2+) ions and triggers a significant conformational change that closes the mouth of the active site and optimizes packing density in the enzyme-substrate complex. The attenuation of active site closure in D100E trichodiene synthase compromises enzyme-substrate packing density and confers additional spatial and conformational degrees of freedom on the substrate and carbocation intermediates, which in turn results in the formation of five alternate sesquiterpene products in addition to trichodiene. By extension, then, the diversity of terpene cyclases in biology may have evolved in part by amino acid substitutions that fine-tune structural changes dependent on metal-diphosphate complexation that govern the formation of the active site template and enzyme-substrate packing density.
8990497	Dynamics of Fusarium solani cutinase investigated through structural comparison among different crystal forms of its variants.	In characterizing mutants and covalently inhibited complexes of Fusarium solani cutinase, which is a 197-residue lipolytic enzyme, 34 variant structures, crystallizing in 8 different crystal forms, have been determined, mostly at high resolution. Taking advantage of this considerable body of information, a structural comparative analysis was carried out to investigate the dynamics of cutinase. Surface loops were identified as the major flexible protein regions, particularly those forming the active-site groove, whereas the elements constituting the protein scaffold were found to retain the same conformation in all the cutinase variants studied. Flexibility turned out to be correlated with thermal motion. With a given crystal packing environment, a high flexibility turned out to be correlated with a low involvement in crystal packing contacts. The high degree of crystal polymorphism, which allowed different conformations with similar energy to be detected, made it possible to identify motions which would have remained unidentified if only a single crystal form had been available. Fairly good agreement was found to exist between the data obtained from the structural comparison and those from a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation carried out on the native enzyme. The crystallographic approach used in this study turned out to be a suitable tool for investigating cutinase dynamics. Because of the availability of a set of closely related proteins in different crystal environments, the intrinsic drawback of a crystallographic approach was bypassed. By combining several static pictures, the dynamics of the protein could be monitored much more realistically than what can be achieved on the basis of static pictures alone.
11513582	Crystal structure of thrombin-ecotin reveals conformational changes and extended interactions.	The protease inhibitor ecotin fails to inhibit thrombin despite its broad specificity against serine proteases. A point mutation (M84R) in ecotin results in a 1.5 nM affinity for thrombin, 10(4) times stronger than that of wild-type ecotin. The crystal structure of bovine thrombin is determined in complex with ecotin M84R mutant at 2.5 A resolution. Surface loops surrounding the active site cleft of thrombin have undergone significant structural changes to permit inhibitor binding. Particularly, the insertion loops at residues 60 and 148 in thrombin, which likely mediate the interactions with macromolecules, are displaced when the complex forms. Thrombin and ecotin M84R interact in two distinct surfaces. The loop at residue 99 and the C-terminus of thrombin contact ecotin through mixed polar and nonpolar interactions. The active site of thrombin is filled with eight consecutive amino acids of ecotin and demonstrates thrombin's preference for specific features that are compatible with the thrombin cleavage site: negatively charged-Pro-Val-X-Pro-Arg-hydrophobic-positively charged (P1 Arg is in bold letters). The preference for a Val at P4 is clearly defined. The insertion at residue 60 may further affect substrate binding by moving its adjacent loops that are part of the substrate recognition sites.
12618186	Crystal structure of a transition state mimic for Tdp1 assembled from vanadate, DNA, and a topoisomerase I-derived peptide.	Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase (Tdp1) is a member of the phospholipase D superfamily and acts as a DNA repair enzyme that removes stalled topoisomerase I- DNA complexes by hydrolyzing the bond between a tyrosine side chain and a DNA 3' phosphate. Despite the complexity of the substrate of this phosphodiesterase, vanadate succeeded in linking human Tdp1, a tyrosine-containing peptide, and a single-stranded DNA oligonucleotide into a quaternary complex that mimics the transition state for the first step of the catalytic reaction. The conformation of the bound substrate mimic gives compelling evidence that the topoisomerase I-DNA complex must undergo extensive modification prior to cleavage by Tdp1. The structure also illustrates that the use of vanadate as the central moiety in high-order complexes has the potential to be a general method for capturing protein-substrate interactions for phosphoryl transfer enzymes, even when the substrates are large, complicated, and unusual.
11455603	The crystal structure of chorismate lyase shows a new fold and a tightly retained product.	The enzyme chorismate lyase (CL) catalyzes the removal of pyruvate from chorismate to produce 4-hydroxy benzoate (4HB) for the ubiquinone pathway. In Escherichia coli, CL is monomeric, with 164 residues. We have determined the structure of the CL product complex by crystallographic heavy-atom methods and report the structure at 1.4-A resolution for a fully active double Cys-to-Ser mutant and at 2.0-A resolution for the wild-type. The fold involves a 6-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet with no spanning helices and novel connectivity. The product is bound internally, adjacent to the sheet, with its polar groups coordinated by two main-chain amides and by the buried side-chains of Arg 76 and Glu 155. The 4HB is completely sequestered from solvent in a largely hydrophobic environment behind two helix-turn-helix loops. The extensive product binding that is observed is consistent with biochemical measurements of slow product release and 10-fold stronger binding of product than substrate. Substrate binding and kinetically rate-limiting product release apparently require the rearrangement of these active-site-covering loops. Implications for the biological function of the high product binding are considered in light of the unique cellular role of 4HB, which is produced by cytoplasmic CL but is used by the membrane-bound enzyme 4HB octaprenyltransferase.
8841139	Three-dimensional structures of HIV-1 and SIV protease product complexes.	Strain is eliminated as a factor in hydrolysis of the scissile peptide bond by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), based on the first eight complexes of products of hydrolysis with the enzymes. The carboxyl group generated at the scissile bond interacts with both catalytic aspartic acids. The structures directly suggest the interactions of the gemdiol intermediate with the active site. Based on the structures, the nucleophilic water is displaced stereospecifically by substrate binding toward one catalytic aspartic acid, while the scissile carbonyl becomes hydrogen bonded to the other catalytic aspartic acid in position for hydrolysis. Crystal structures for two N-terminal (P) products and two C-terminal (Q) products provide unambiguous density for the ligands at 2.2-2.6 A resolution and 17-21% R factors. The N-terminal product, Ac-S-L-N-F/, overlaps closely with the N-terminal sequences of peptidomimetic inhibitors bound to the protease. Comparison of the two C-terminal products, /F-L-E-K and /F(NO2)-E-A-Nle-S, indicates that the P2' residue is highly constrained, while the positioning of the P1' and P3' residues are sequence dependent.
7836457	How potassium affects the activity of the molecular chaperone Hsc70. I. Potassium is required for optimal ATPase activity.	Several functions of the 70-kilodalton heat shock cognate protein (Hsc70), such as peptide binding/release and clathrin uncoating, have been shown to require potassium ions. We have examined the effect of monovalent ions on the ATPase activity of Hsc70. The steady-state ATPase activities of Hsc70 and its amino-terminal 44-kDa ATPase fragment are minimal in the absence of K+ and reach a maximum at approximately 0.1 M [K+]. Activation of the ATPase turnover correlates with the ionic radii of monovalent ions; those that are at least 0.3 A smaller (Na+ and Li+) or larger (Cs+) than K+ show negligible activation, whereas ions with radii differing only approximately 0.1 A from that of K+ (NH4+ and Rb+) activate to approximately half the turnover rate observed with K+. Single turnover experiments with Hsc70 demonstrate that ATP hydrolysis is 5-fold slower with Na+ than with K+. The equilibrium binding of ADP or ATP to Hsc70 is unperturbed when K+ is replaced with Na+. These results are consistent with a role for monovalent ions as specific cofactors in the enzymatic hydrolysis of ATP.
11573087	Arsenate reductase from S. aureus plasmid pI258 is a phosphatase drafted for redox duty.	Arsenate reductase (ArsC) from Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pI258 plays a role in bacterial heavy metal resistance and catalyzes the reduction of arsenate to arsenite. The structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of ArsC were solved. ArsC has the PTPase I fold typical for low molecular weight tyrosine phosphatases (LMW PTPases). Remarkably, kinetic experiments show that pI258 ArsC also catalyzes the tyrosine phosphatase reaction in addition to arsenate reduction. These results provide evidence that ArsC from pI258 evolved from LMW PTPase by the grafting of a redox function onto a pre-existing catalytic site and that its evolutionary origin is different from those of arsenate reductases from Escherichia coli plasmid R773 and from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The mechanism proposed here for the catalysis of arsenate reduction by pI258 ArsC involves a nucleophilic attack by Cys 10 on arsenate, the formation of a covalent intermediate and the transport of oxidative equivalents by a disulfide cascade. The reaction is associated with major structural changes in the ArsC.
11779231	Non-standard insulin design: structure-activity relationships at the periphery of the insulin receptor.	The design of insulin analogues has emphasized stabilization or destabilization of structural elements according to established principles of protein folding. To this end, solvent-exposed side-chains extrinsic to the receptor-binding surface provide convenient sites of modification. An example is provided by an unfavorable helical C-cap (Thr(A8)) whose substitution by favorable amino acids (His(A8) or Arg(A8)) has yielded analogues of improved stability. Remarkably, these analogues also exhibit enhanced activity, suggesting that activity may correlate with stability. Here, we test this hypothesis by substitution of diaminobutyric acid (Dab(A8)), like threonine an amino acid of low helical propensity. The crystal structure of Dab(A8)-insulin is similar to those of native insulin and the related analogue Lys(A8)-insulin. Although no more stable than native insulin, the non-standard analogue is twice as active. Stability and affinity can therefore be uncoupled. To investigate alternative mechanisms by which A8 substitutions enhance activity, multiple substitutions were introduced. Surprisingly, diverse aliphatic, aromatic and polar side-chains enhance receptor binding and biological activity. Because no relationship is observed between activity and helical propensity, we propose that local interactions between the A8 side-chain and an edge of the hormone-receptor interface modulate affinity. Dab(A8)-insulin illustrates the utility of non-standard amino acids in hypothesis-driven protein design.
9770455	The anti-angiogenic agent fumagillin covalently modifies a conserved active-site histidine in the Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase.	Methionine aminopeptidase (MetAP) exists in two forms (type I and type II), both of which remove the N-terminal methionine from proteins. It previously has been shown that the type II enzyme is the molecular target of fumagillin and ovalicin, two epoxide-containing natural products that inhibit angiogenesis and suppress tumor growth. By using mass spectrometry, N-terminal sequence analysis, and electronic absorption spectroscopy we show that fumagillin and ovalicin covalently modify a conserved histidine residue in the active site of the MetAP from Escherichia coli, a type I enzyme. Because all of the key active site residues are conserved, it is likely that a similar modification occurs in the type II enzymes. This modification, by occluding the active site, may prevent the action of MetAP on proteins or peptides involved in angiogenesis. In addition, the results suggest that these compounds may be effective pharmacological agents against pathogenic and resistant forms of E. coli and other microorganisms.
8475042	Engineering cysteine mutants to obtain crystallographic phases with a cutinase from Fusarium solani pisi.	Cutinases are extracellular enzymes involved in the disruption of cutine, an insoluble polyester which covers the surface of plants. They belong to a class of serine esterases that are able to hydrolyse fatty acid esters and emulsified triglycerides as efficiently as lipases, but without displaying interfacial activation. Classical crystallographic methods for obtaining heavy-atom derivatives failed, so the cutinase structure has been solved exclusively by the multiple isomorphous replacement method using four Hg derivatives obtained from mutants S4C, S92C, S120C and S129C. Two of these derivatives behaved as expected: (i) the cys mutant of the catalytic Ser S120C, located at the surface of the active site pocket, leads to a good derivative; and (ii) the Hg atom of the derivative obtained with the S92C mutant is completely accessible to the solvent and occupies two alternative positions--consequently a poor derivative results. In contrast, two mutants show an unexpected behaviour: (i) the Hg atom in the S129C mutant was completely buried 10 A below the protein surface and yielded the best derivative; and (ii) a poor quality derivative was obtained with the S4C mutant. Cys 4 belongs to the disordered propeptide 1-16. The Cys 4 bound Hg atom is located in front of the Asp58 side chain, but neither Cys4 nor parts of the propeptide are clearly visible in the electron density maps of the derivative structure.
117110	Molecular structure of the alpha-lytic protease from Myxobacter 495 at 2.8 Angstroms resolution.	null
15117963	Crystal structures of Staphylococcus aureus sortase A and its substrate complex.	The cell wall envelope of staphylococci and other Gram-positive pathogens is coated with surface proteins that interact with human host tissues. Surface proteins of Staphylococcus aureus are covalently linked to the cell wall envelope by a mechanism requiring C-terminal sorting signals with an LPXTG motif. Sortase (SrtA) cleaves surface proteins between the threonine (T) and the glycine (G) of the LPXTG motif and catalyzes the formation of an amide bond between threonine at the C-terminal end of polypeptides and cell wall cross-bridges. The active site architecture and catalytic mechanism of sortase A has hitherto not been revealed. Here we present the crystal structures of native SrtA, of an active site mutant of SrtA, and of the mutant SrtA complexed with its substrate LPETG peptide and describe the substrate binding pocket of the enzyme. Highly conserved proline (P) and threonine (T) residues of the LPXTG motif are held in position by hydrophobic contacts, whereas the glutamic acid residue (E) at the X position points out into the solvent. The scissile T-G peptide bond is positioned between the active site Cys(184) and Arg(197) residues and at a greater distance from the imidazolium side chain of His(120). All three residues, His(120), Cys(184), and Arg(197), are conserved in sortase enzymes from Gram-positive bacteria. Comparison of the active sites of S. aureus sortase A and sortase B provides insight into substrate specificity and suggests a universal sortase-catalyzed mechanism of bacterial surface protein anchoring in Gram-positive bacteria.
9020766	Contribution of the hydrophobic effect to the stability of human lysozyme: calorimetric studies and X-ray structural analyses of the nine valine to alanine mutants.	To clarify the contribution of the hydrophobic effect to the conformational stability of human lysozyme, a series of Val to Ala mutants were constructed. The thermodynamic parameters for the denaturation of these nine mutant proteins were determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and the crystal structures were solved at high resolution. The denaturation Gibbs energy (delta delta G) and enthalpy (delta delta H) values of the mutant proteins ranged from +2.2 to- 6.3 kJ/mol and from +7 to -17 kJ/mol, respectively. The structural analyses showed that the mutation site and/or the residues around it in some proteins shifted toward the created cavity, and the substitutions affected not only the mutations site but also other parts far from the site, although the structural changes were not as great. Correlation between the changes in the thermodynamic parameters and the structural features of mutant proteins was examined, including the five Ile to Val mutant human lysozymes [Takano et al. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 254, 62-76]. There was no simple general correlation between delta delta G and the changes in hydrophobic surface area exposed upon denaturation (delta delta ASAHP). We found only a new correlation between the delta delta G and delta delta ASAHP of all of the hydrophobic residues if the effect of the secondary structure propensity was taken into account.
7986100	Expression of a plant sesquiterpene cyclase gene in Escherichia coli.	5-Epi-aristolochene synthase is a sesquiterpene cyclase activity found in pathogen-challenged tobacco cells, but not in nonchallenged tissues, and appears to be encoded by a complex gene family. As a prerequisite to assessing the functional significance of these multiple genes, bacterial expression systems were examined for their capacity to express a tobacco sesquiterpene cyclase cDNA. Insertion of full-length 5-epi-aristolochene synthase cDNA into two commonly used expression vectors, pET-11d and pGBT-T19, resulted in high level expression of the cyclase activity. The highest level of expression occurred 3 h after induction with low concentrations (0.1-0.5 mM) of IPTG, incubation at 27 degrees C instead of 37 degrees C, and in the bacterial host strain BL21(DE3). Under these conditions, the cyclase protein constituted 5 to 8% of the soluble and 35% of the total Escherichia coli proteins. Enzyme reaction products of the native tobacco and recombinant enzyme were identical, based on argentation-thin layer chromatography. Deletion mutants of the cyclase gene corresponding to the amino and carboxy termini of the enzyme were prepared. The cyclase proteins resulting from bacterial expression of these mutant constructs were found largely in the insoluble protein fraction and no soluble enzyme activity was detected.
9655329	The crystal structure of Lactococcus lactis dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A complexed with the enzyme reaction product throws light on its enzymatic function.	Dihydroorotate dehydrogenases (DHODs) catalyze the oxidation of (S)-dihydroorotate to orotate, the fourth step and only redox reaction in the de novo biosynthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides. A description is given of the crystal structure of Lactococcus lactis dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A (DHODA) complexed with the product of the enzyme reaction orotate. The structure of the complex to 2.0 A resolution has been compared with the structure of the native enzyme. The active site of DHODA is known to contain a water filled cavity buried beneath a highly conserved and flexible loop. In the complex the orotate displaces the water molecules from the active site and stacks above the DHODA flavin isoalloxazine ring, causing only small movements of the surrounding protein residues. The orotate is completely buried beneath the protein surface, and the orotate binding causes a significant reduction in the mobility of the active site loop. The orotate is bound by four conserved asparagine side chains (Asn 67, Asn 127, Asn 132, and Asn 193), the side chains of Lys 43 and Ser 194, and the main chain NH groups of Met 69, Gly 70, and Leu 71. Of these the Lys 43 side chain makes hydrogen bonds to both the flavin isoalloxazine ring and the carboxylate group of the orotate. Potential interactions with bound dihydroorotate are considered using the orotate complex as a basis for molecular modeling. The role of Cys 130 as the active site base is discussed, and the sequence conservation of the active site residues across the different families of DHODs is reviewed, along with implications for differences in substrate binding and in the catalytic mechanisms between these families.
9757109	Continuous and discontinuous changes in the unit cell of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase crystals on dehydration.	A crystal form of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) complexed with inhibitors showed diffraction to a high-resolution limit of 3.7 A. Instability in the unit-cell dimensions of these crystals was observed during soaking experiments, but the range of this variability and consequent change in lattice order was revealed by a chance observation of dehydration. Deliberately induced dehydration results in crystals having a variety of unit cells, the best-ordered of which show diffraction to a minimum Bragg spacing of 2.2 A. In order to understand the molecular basis for this phenomenon, the initial observation of dehydration, the data sets from dehydrated crystals, the crystal packing and the domain conformation of RT are analysed in detail here. This analysis reveals that the crystals undergo remarkable changes following a variety of possible dehydration pathways: some changes occur gradually whilst others are abrupt and require significant domain rearrangements. Comparison of domain arrangements in different crystal forms gives insight into the flexibility of RT which, in turn, may reflect the internal motions allowing this therapeutically important enzyme to fulfill its biological function.
9705310	High resolution structure of the N-terminal domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 and characterization of its interaction site with matrix metalloproteinase-3.	The high resolution structure of the N-terminal domain of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (N-TIMP-2) in solution has been determined using multidimensional heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy, with the structural calculations based on an extensive set of constraints, including 3132 nuclear Overhauser effect-based distance constraints, 56 hydrogen bond constraints, and 220 torsion angle constraints (an average of 26.9 constraints/residue). The core of the protein consists of a five-stranded beta-barrel that is homologous to the beta-barrel found in the oligosaccharide/oligonucleotide binding protein fold. The binding site for the catalytic domain of matrix metalloproteinases-3 (N-MMP-3) on N-TIMP-2 has been mapped by determining the changes in chemical shifts on complex formation for signals from the protein backbone (15N, 13C, and 1H). This approach identified a discrete N-MMP-3 binding site on N-TIMP-2 composed of the N terminus of the protein and the loops between beta-strands AB, CD, and EF. The beta-hairpin formed from strands A and B in N-TIMP-2 is significantly longer than the equivalent structure in TIMP-1, allowing it to make more extensive binding interactions with the MMP catalytic domain. A detailed comparison of the N-TIMP-2 structure with that of TIMP-1 bound to N-MMP-3 (Gomis-Ruth, F.-X., Maskos, K., Betz, M., Bergner, A., Huber, R., Suzuki, K., Yoshida, N., Nagase, H. , Brew, K., Bourne, G. P., Bartunik, H. & Bode, W. (1997) Nature 389, 77-80) revealed that the core beta-barrels are very similar in topology but that the loop connecting beta-strands CD (P67-C72) would need to undergo a large conformational change for TIMP-2 to bind in a similar manner to TIMP-1.
9571026	Structural and functional analysis of the 1:1 growth hormone:receptor complex reveals the molecular basis for receptor affinity.	The designed G120R mutant of human growth hormone (hGH) is an antagonist and can bind only one molecule of the growth hormone receptor. We have determined the crystal structure of the 1:1 complex between this mutant and the receptor extracellular domain (hGHbp) at 2.6 A resolution, and used it to guide a detailed survey of the structural and functional basis for hormone-receptor recognition. The overall structure of the complex is very similar to the equivalent portion of the 1:2 complex, showing that formation of the active complex does not involve major conformational changes. However, a segment involved in receptor-receptor interactions in the 1:2 complex is disordered in this structure, suggesting that its productive conformation is stabilized by receptor dimerization.The hormone binding site of the receptor comprises a central hydrophobic patch dominated by Trp104 and Trp169, surrounded by a hydrophilic periphery containing several well-ordered water molecules. Previous alanine scanning showed that the hydrophobic "hot spot" confers most of the binding energy. The new structural data, coupled with binding and kinetic analysis of further mutants, indicate that the hot spot is assembled cooperatively and that many residues contribute indirectly to binding. Several hydrophobic residues serve to orient the key tryptophan residues; kinetic analysis suggests that Pro106 locks the Trp104 main-chain into a required conformation. The electrostatic contacts of Arg43 to hGH are less important than the intramolecular packing of its alkyl chain with Trp169. The true functional epitope that directly contributes binding energy may therefore comprise as few as six side-chains, participating mostly in alkyl-aromatic stacking interactions. Outside the functional epitope, multiple mutation of residues to alanine resulted in non-additive increases in affinity: up to tenfold for a hepta-alanine mutant. Contacts in the epitope periphery can therefore attenuate the affinity of the central hot spot, perhaps reflecting a role in conferring specificity to the interaction.
12221284	Convergent evolution sheds light on the anti-beta -elimination mechanism common to family 1 and 10 polysaccharide lyases.	Enzyme-catalyzed beta-elimination of sugar uronic acids, exemplified by the degradation of plant cell wall pectins, plays an important role in a wide spectrum of biological processes ranging from the recycling of plant biomass through to pathogen virulence. The three-dimensional crystal structure of the catalytic module of a "family PL-10" polysaccharide lyase, Pel10Acm from Cellvibrio japonicus, solved at a resolution of 1.3 A, reveals a new polysaccharide lyase fold and is the first example of a polygalacturonic acid lyase that does not exhibit the "parallel beta-helix" topology. The "Michaelis" complex of an inactive mutant in association with the substrate trigalacturonate/Ca2+ reveals the catalytic machinery harnessed by this polygalacturonate lyase, which displays a stunning resemblance, presumably through convergent evolution, to the tetragalacturonic acid complex observed for a structurally unrelated polygalacturonate lyase from family PL-1. Common coordination of the -1 and +1 subsite saccharide carboxylate groups by a protein-liganded Ca2+ ion, the positioning of an arginine catalytic base in close proximity to the alpha-carbon hydrogen and numerous other conserved enzyme-substrate interactions, considered in light of mutagenesis data for both families, suggest a generic polysaccharide anti-beta-elimination mechanism.
11914495	Crystallization and preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies of a complex between the Lactococcus lactis Fpg DNA-repair enzyme and an abasic site containing DNA.	For protein-DNA complex crystallization, the choice of the DNA fragment is crucial. With the aim of crystallizing the 31 kDa Fpg DNA-repair enzyme bound to DNA, oligonucleotide duplexes varying in length, sequence, end type and nature of the specific DNA target site were used. Crystals of several protein-DNA combinations grew from solutions containing both polyethylene glycol and salt. This systematic crystallization screening followed by optimization of the crystallization conditions by microseeding led to crystals of Fpg bound to a 13 base-pair duplex DNA carrying the 1,3-propanediol abasic site analogue which are suitable for crystallographic analysis. Complete native data sets have been collected to 2.1 A resolution.
8855252	Potential use of additivity of mutational effects in simplifying protein engineering.	The problem of rationally engineering protein molecules can be simplified where effects of mutations on protein function are additive. Crystal structures of single and double mutants in the hydrophobic core of gene V protein indicate that structural and functional effects of core mutations are additive when the regions structurally influenced by the mutations do not substantially overlap. These regions of influence can provide a simple basis for identifying sets of mutations that will show additive effects.
16083884	Crystal structure of a mutant elongation factor G trapped with a GTP analogue.	Elongation factor G (EF-G) is a G protein factor that catalyzes the translocation step in protein synthesis on the ribosome. Its GTP conformation in the absence of the ribosome is currently unknown. We present the structure of a mutant EF-G (T84A) in complex with the non-hydrolysable GTP analogue GDPNP. The crystal structure provides a first insight into conformational changes induced in EF-G by GTP. Comparison of this structure with that of EF-G in complex with GDP suggests that the GTP and GDP conformations in solution are very similar and that the major contribution to the active GTPase conformation, which is quite different, therefore comes from its interaction with the ribosome.
11371559	Mutations in the G-domain of elongation factor G from Thermus thermophilus affect both its interaction with GTP and fusidic acid.	Two hypersensitive and two resistant variants of elongation factor-G (EF-G) toward fusidic acid are studied in comparison with the wild type factor. All mutated proteins are active in a cell-free translation system and ribosome-dependent GTP hydrolysis. The EF-G variants with the Thr-84-->Ala or Asp-109-->Lys mutations bring about a strong resistance of EF-G to the antibiotic, whereas the EF-Gs with substitutions Gly-16-->Val or Glu-119-->Lys are the first examples of fusidic acid-hypersensitive factors. A correlation between fusidic acid resistance of EF-G mutants and their affinity to GTP are revealed in this study, although their interactions with GDP are not changed. Thus, fusidic acid-hypersensitive mutants have the high affinity to an uncleavable GTP analog, but the association of resistant mutants with GTP is decreased. The effects of either fusidic acid-sensitive or resistant mutations can be explained by the conformational changes in the EF-G molecule, which influence its GTP-binding center. The results presented in this paper indicate that fusidic acid-sensitive mutant factors have a conformation favorable for GTP binding and subsequent interaction with the ribosomes.
2005620	Refined crystal structure of beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 at 2.0 A resolution.	The crystal structure of a class A beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 has been refined at 2.0 A resolution. The resulting crystallographic R-factor (R = sigma h parallel Fo[-]Fc parallel/sigma h[Fo], where [Fo] and [Fc] are the observed and calculated structure factor amplitudes, respectively), is 0.163 for the 17,547 reflections with I greater than or equal to 2 sigma (I) within the 8.0 A to 2.0 A resolution range. The molecule consists of two closely associated domains. One domain is formed by a five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet with three helices packing against a face of the sheet. The second domain is formed mostly by helices that pack against the second face of the sheet. The active site is located in the interface between the two domains, and many of the residues that form it are conserved in all known sequences of class A beta-lactamases. Similar to the serine proteases, an oxyanion hole is implicated in catalysis. It is formed by two main-chain nitrogen atoms, that of the catalytic seryl residue, Ser70, and that of Gln237 on an edge beta-strand of the major beta-sheet. Ser70 is interacting with another conserved seryl residue, Ser130, located between the two ammonium groups of the functionally important lysine residues, Lys73 and Lys234. Such intricate interactions point to a possible catalytic role for this second seryl residue. Another key catalytic residue is Glu166. There are several unusual structural features associated with the active site. (1) A cis peptide bond has been identified between the catalytic Glu166 and Ile167. (2) Ala69 and Leu220 have strained phi, psi dihedral angles making close contacts that restrict the conformation of the active site beta-strand involved in the formation of the oxyanion hole. (3) A buried aspartate residue, the conserved Asp233, is located next to the active site Lys234. It is interacting with another buried aspartyl residue, Asp246. An internal solvent molecule is also involved, but the rest of its interactions with the protein indicate it is not a cation. (4) Another conserved aspartyl residue that is desolvated is Asp131, adjacent to Ser130. Its charge is stabilized by interactions with four main-chain nitrogen atoms. (5) An internal cavity underneath the active site depression is filled with six solvent molecules. This, and an adjacent cavity occupied by three solvent molecules partially separate the omega-loop associated with the active site from the rest of the protein.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
1871600	A novel, highly stable fold of the immunoglobulin binding domain of streptococcal protein G.	The high-resolution three-dimensional structure of a single immunoglobulin binding domain (B1, which comprises 56 residues including the NH2-terminal Met) of protein G from group G Streptococcus has been determined in solution by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy on the basis of 1058 experimental restraints. The average atomic root-mean-square distribution about the mean coordinate positions is 0.27 angstrom (A) for the backbone atoms, 0.65 A for all atoms, and 0.39 A for atoms excluding disordered surface side chains. The structure has no disulfide bridges and is composed of a four-stranded beta sheet, on top of which lies a long helix. The central two strands (beta 1 and beta 4), comprising the NH2- and COOH-termini, are parallel, and the outer two strands (beta 2 and beta 3) are connected by the helix in a +3x crossover. This novel topology (-1, +3x, -1), coupled with an extensive hydrogen-bonding network and a tightly packed and buried hydrophobic core, is probably responsible for the extreme thermal stability of this small domain (reversible melting at 87 degrees C).
25387	The structure of the flavoenzyme glutathione reductase.	The three-dimensional structure of the dimeric flavoenzyme glutathione reductase from human erythrocytes has been elucidated by an X-ray diffraction analysis at 0.3 nm resolution. The polypeptide chain has been traced, and the binding positions of FAD, NADP and glutathione have been determined. A mechanism for the electron transfer is discussed.
12827284	Isolation and characterization of hainantoxin-IV, a novel antagonist of tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channels from the Chinese bird spider Selenocosmia hainana.	A neurotoxin, named hainantoxin-IV, was purified from the venom of the spider Selenocosmia hainana. The amino acid sequence was determined by Edman degradation, revealing it to be a 35-residue polypeptide amidated at its C terminal and including three disulfide bridges: Cys2-Cys17, Cys9-Cys24, and Cys16-Cys31 assigned by partial reduction and sequence analysis. Hainantoxin-IV shares 80% sequence identity with huwentoxin-IV from the spider S. huwena, a potent antagonist that acts at site 1 on tetrodotoxin-sensitive (TTX-S) sodium channels, suggesting that hainantoxin-IV adopts an inhibitor cystine knot structural motif like huwentoin-IV. Under whole-cell voltage-clamp conditions, this toxin has no effect on tetrodotoxin-resistant voltage-gated sodium channels in adult rat dorsal root ganglion neurons, while it blocks TTX-S sodium channels in a manner similar to huwentoxin-IV, and the actions of both toxins on sodium currents are very similar to that of tetrodotoxin. Thus, they define a new family of spider toxins affecting sodium channels.
14756552	Structural basis for the exocellulase activity of the cellobiohydrolase CbhA from Clostridium thermocellum.	Numerous bacterial and fungal organisms have evolved elaborate sets of modular glycoside hydrolases and similar enzymes aimed at the degradation of polymeric carbohydrates. Presently, on the basis of sequence similarity catalytic modules of these enzymes have been classified into 90 families. Representatives of a particular family display similar fold and catalytic mechanisms. However, within families distinctions occur with regard to enzymatic properties and type of activity against carbohydrate chains. Cellobiohydrolase CbhA from Clostridium thermocellum is a large seven-modular enzyme with a catalytic module belonging to family 9. In contrast to other representatives of that family possessing only endo- and, in few cases, endo/exo-cellulase activities, CbhA is exclusively an exocellulase. The crystal structures of the combination of the immunoglobulin-like module and the catalytic module of CbhA (Ig-GH9_CbhA) and that of an inactive mutant Ig-GH9_CbhA(E795Q) in complex with cellotetraose (CTT) are reported here. The detailed analysis of these structures reveals that, while key catalytic residues and overall fold are conserved in this enzyme and those of other family 9 glycoside hydrolases, the active site of GH9_CbhA is blocked off after the -2 subsite. This feature which is created by an extension and altered conformation of a single loop region explains the inability of the active site of CbhA to accommodate a long cellulose chain and to cut it internally. This altered loop region is responsible for the exocellulolytic activity of the enzyme.
11025547	X-ray crystallographic study of xylopentaose binding to Pseudomonas fluorescens xylanase A.	The structure of the complex between a catalytically compromised family 10 xylanase and a xylopentaose substrate has been determined by X-ray crystallography and refined to 3.2 A resolution. The substrate binds at the C-terminal end of the eightfold betaalpha-barrel of Pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa xylanase A and occupies substrate binding subsites -1 to +4. Crystal contacts are shown to prevent the expected mode of binding from subsite -2 to +3, because of steric hindrance to subsite -2. The loss of accessible surface at individual subsites on binding of xylopentaose parallels well previously reported experimental measurements of individual subsites binding energies, decreasing going from subsite +2 to +4. Nine conserved residues contribute to subsite -1, including three tryptophan residues forming an aromatic cage around the xylosyl residue at this subsite. One of these, Trp 313, is the single residue contributing most lost accessible surface to subsite -1, and goes from a highly mobile to a well-defined conformation on binding of the substrate. A comparison of xylanase A with C. fimi CEX around the +1 subsite suggests that a flatter and less polar surface is responsible for the better catalytic properties of CEX on aryl substrates. The view of catalysis that emerges from combining this with previously published work is the following: (1) xylan is recognized and bound by the xylanase as a left-handed threefold helix; (2) the xylosyl residue at subsite -1 is distorted and pulled down toward the catalytic residues, and the glycosidic bond is strained and broken to form the enzyme-substrate covalent intermediate; (3) the intermediate is attacked by an activated water molecule, following the classic retaining glycosyl hydrolase mechanism.
16407973	Dual role of MutS glutamate 38 in DNA mismatch discrimination and in the authorization of repair.	MutS plays a critical role in DNA mismatch repair in Escherichia coli by binding to mismatches and initiating repair in an ATP-dependent manner. Mutational analysis of a highly conserved glutamate, Glu38, has revealed its role in mismatch recognition by enabling MutS to discriminate between homoduplex and mismatched DNA. Crystal structures of MutS have shown that Glu38 forms a hydrogen bond to one of the mismatched bases. In this study, we have analyzed the crystal structures, DNA binding and the response to ATP binding of three Glu38 mutants. While confirming the role of the negative charge in initial discrimination, we show that in vivo mismatch repair can proceed even when discrimination is low. We demonstrate that the formation of a hydrogen bond by residue 38 to the mismatched base authorizes repair by inducing intramolecular signaling, which results in the inhibition of rapid hydrolysis of distally bound ATP. This allows formation of the stable MutS-ATP-DNA clamp, a key intermediate in triggering downstream repair events.
10446375	Crystal structure of a ribonuclease from the seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) at 1.75 A resolution.	The ribonuclease MC1 (RNase MC1) from seeds of bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) consists of 190 amino acid residues with four disulfide bridges and belongs to the RNase T(2) family, including fungal RNases typified by RNase Rh from Rhizopus niveus and RNase T(2) from Aspergillus oryzae. The crystal structure of RNase MC1 has been determined at 1.75 A resolution with an R-factor of 19.7% using the single isomorphous replacement method. RNase MC1 structurally belongs to the (alpha+beta) class of proteins, having ten helices (six alpha-helices and four 3(10)-helices) and eight beta-strands. When the structures of RNase MC1 and RNase Rh are superposed, the close agreement between the alpha-carbon positions for the total structure is obvious: the root mean square deviations calculated only for structurally related 151 alpha-carbon atoms of RNase MC1 and RNase Rh molecules was 1.76 A. Furthermore, the conformation of the catalytic residues His-46, Glu-105, and His-109 in RNase Rh can be easily superposed with that of the possible catalytic residues His-34, Glu-84, and His-88 in RNase MC1. This observation strongly indicates that RNase MC1 from a plant origin catalyzes RNA degradation in a similar manner as fungal RNases.
15107837	Structures of HIV-1 RT-DNA complexes before and after incorporation of the anti-AIDS drug tenofovir.	Tenofovir, also known as PMPA, R-9-(2-(phosphonomethoxypropyl)adenine, is a nucleotide reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitor. We have determined the crystal structures of two related complexes of HIV-1 RT with template primer and tenofovir: (i) a ternary complex at a resolution of 3.0 A of RT crosslinked to a dideoxy-terminated DNA with tenofovir-diphosphate bound as the incoming substrate; and (ii) a RT-DNA complex at a resolution of 3.1 A with tenofovir at the 3' primer terminus. The tenofovir nucleotide in the tenofovir-terminated structure seems to adopt multiple conformations. Some nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, including 3TC and AZT, have elements ('handles') that project beyond the corresponding elements on normal dNTPs (the 'substrate envelope'). HIV-1 RT resistance mechanisms to AZT and 3TC take advantage of these handles; tenofovir's structure lacks handles that could protrude through the substrate envelope to cause resistance.
12526797	Structures of the alpha L I domain and its complex with ICAM-1 reveal a shape-shifting pathway for integrin regulation.	The structure of the I domain of integrin alpha L beta 2 bound to the Ig superfamily ligand ICAM-1 reveals the open ligand binding conformation and the first example of an integrin-IgSF interface. The I domain Mg2+ directly coordinates Glu-34 of ICAM-1, and a dramatic swing of I domain residue Glu-241 enables a critical salt bridge. Liganded and unliganded structures for both high- and intermediate-affinity mutant I domains reveal that ligand binding can induce conformational change in the alpha L I domain and that allosteric signals can convert the closed conformation to intermediate or open conformations without ligand binding. Pulling down on the C-terminal alpha 7 helix with introduced disulfide bonds ratchets the beta 6-alpha 7 loop into three different positions in the closed, intermediate, and open conformations, with a progressive increase in affinity.
11045615	High resolution refinement of beta-galactosidase in a new crystal form reveals multiple metal-binding sites and provides a structural basis for alpha-complementation.	The unrefined fold of Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase based on a monoclinic crystal form with four independent tetramers has been reported previously. Here, we describe a new, orthorhombic form with one tetramer per asymmetric unit that has permitted refinement of the structure at 1.7 A resolution. This high-resolution analysis has confirmed the original description of the structure and revealed new details. An essential magnesium ion, identified at the active site in the monoclinic crystals, is also seen in the orthorhombic form. Additional putative magnesium binding sites are also seen. Sodium ions are also known to affect catalysis, and five putative binding sites have been identified, one close to the active site. In a crevice on the protein surface, five linked five-membered solvent rings form a partial clathrate-like structure. Some other unusual aspects of the structure include seven apparent cis-peptide bonds, four of which are proline, and several internal salt-bridge networks. Deep solvent-filled channels and tunnels extend across the surface of the molecule and pass through the center of the tetramer. Because of these departures from a compact globular shape, the molecule is not well characterized by prior empirical relationships between the mass and surface area of proteins. The 50 or so residues at the amino terminus have a largely extended conformation and mostly lie across the surface of the protein. At the same time, however, segment 13-21 contributes to a subunit interface, and residues 29-33 pass through a "tunnel" formed by a domain interface. Taken together, the overall arrangement provides a structural basis for the phenomenon of alpha-complementation.
8286366	Cutinase, a lipolytic enzyme with a preformed oxyanion hole.	Cutinases, a group of cutin degrading enzymes with molecular masses of around 22-25 kDa (Kolattukudy, 1984), are also able to efficiently hydrolyse triglycerides (De Geus et al., 1989; Lauwereys et al., 1991), but without exhibiting the interfacial activation phenomenom (Sarda et al., 1958). They belong to a class of proteins with a common structural framework, called the alpha/beta hydrolase fold (Martinez et al., 1992; Ollis et al., 1992). We describe herein the structure of cutinase covalently inhibited by diethyl-p-nitrophenyl phosphate (E600) and refined at 1.9-A resolution. Contrary to what has previously been reported with lipases (Brzozowski et al., 1991; Derewenda et al., 1992; Van Tilbeurgh et al., 1993), no significant structural rearrangement was observed here in cutinase upon the inhibitor binding. Moreover, the structure of the active site machinery, consisting of a catalytic triad (S120, H188, D175) and an oxyanion hole (Q121 and S42), was found to be identical to that of the native enzyme, whereas the oxyanion hole of Rhizomucor lipase (Brzozowski et al., 1991; Derewenda et al., 1992), like that of pancreatic lipase (van Tilbeurgh et al., 1993), is formed only upon enzyme-ligand complex formation. The fact that cutinase does not display interfacial activation cannot therefore only be due to the absence of a lid but might also be attributable to the presence of a preformed oxyanion hole.
11207290	Structural and functional consequences of altering a peptide MHC anchor residue.	To better understand TCR discrimination of multiple ligands, we have analyzed the crystal structures of two Hb peptide/I-E(k) complexes that differ by only a single amino acid substitution at the P6 anchor position within the peptide (E73D). Detailed comparison of multiple independently determined structures at 1.9 A resolution reveals that removal of a single buried methylene group can alter a critical portion of the TCR recognition surface. Significant variance was observed in the peptide P5-P8 main chain as well as a rotamer difference at LeuP8, approximately 10 A distal from the substitution. No significant variations were observed in the conformation of the two MHC class II molecules. The ligand alteration results in two peptide/MHC complexes that generate bulk T cell responses that are distinct and essentially nonoverlapping. For the Hb-specific T cell 3.L2, substitution reduces the potency of the ligand 1000-fold. Soluble 3.L2 TCR binds the two peptide/MHC complexes with similar affinity, although with faster kinetics. These results highlight the role of subtle variations in MHC Ag presentation on T cell activation and signaling.
9535826	Cryo-crystallography of a true substrate, indole-3-glycerol phosphate, bound to a mutant (alphaD60N) tryptophan synthase alpha2beta2 complex reveals the correct orientation of active site alphaGlu49.	The reversible cleavage of indole-3-glycerol by the alpha-subunit of tryptophan synthase has been proposed to be catalyzed by alphaGlu49 and alphaAsp60. Although previous x-ray crystallographic structures of the tryptophan synthase alpha2beta2 complex showed an interaction between the carboxylate of alphaAsp60 and the bound inhibitor indole-3-propanol phosphate, the carboxylate of alphaGlu49 was too distant to play its proposed role. To clarify the structural and functional roles of alphaGlu49, we have determined crystal structures of a mutant (alphaD60N) alpha2beta2 complex in the presence and absence of the true substrate, indole-3-glycerol phosphate. The enzyme in the crystal cleaves indole-3-glycerol phosphate very slowly at room temperature but not under cryo-conditions of 95 K. The structure of the complex with the true substrate obtained by cryo-crystallography reveals that indole-3-glycerol phosphate and indole-3-propanol phosphate have similar binding modes but different torsion angles. Most importantly, the side chain of alphaGlu49 interacts with 3-hydroxyl group of indole-3-glycerol phosphate as proposed. The movement of the side chain of alphaGlu49 into an extended conformation upon binding the true substrate provides evidence for an induced fit mechanism. Our results demonstrate how cryo-crystallography and mutagenesis can provide insight into enzyme mechanism.
8893827	Structure-based design of HIV protease inhibitors: sulfonamide-containing 5,6-dihydro-4-hydroxy-2-pyrones as non-peptidic inhibitors.	null
16522455	Three-dimensional structure and IgE-binding properties of mature fully active Der p 1, a clinically relevant major allergen.	BACKGROUND: Der p 1 is a 25-kd allergen with cysteine protease activity. Sensitization to Der p 1 affects a large proportion of individuals with allergy, resulting in rhinitis, asthma, and/or atopic dermatitis. OBJECTIVE: We determined the Der p 1 crystallographic structure to understand the relationships among structure, function, and allergenicity. METHODS: Recombinant pro-Der p 1 was produced in Pichia pastoris and allowed to mature spontaneously before purification by a 2-step procedure. Protease activity was checked by using a fluorogenic peptide substrate. Allergenicity was analysed by IgE binding assays and basophil activation test. The determination of the 3-dimensional structure was obtained by X-ray crystallography at 1.9 A resolution. RESULTS: The recombinant protein is fully active and expresses an allergenicity equivalent to its natural counterpart. Der p 1 exhibits a cysteine protease fold typical of the papain family, has a magnesium binding site, and forms dimers with a large interface. The crystal lattice shows that the dimers are tightly packed in a compact double layer of proteins. Such an assembly likely exists in dry fecal pellets, the natural form of allergen exposure, and appears ideal to interact with cell surface and trigger allergic inflammation. CONCLUSION: We present here the 3-dimensional structural features of mature fully active Der p 1, one of the main allergens involved in human allergic diseases. This opens the possibility to evaluate the importance of enzymatic activity in pathology and possible new therapeutic interventions.
2684274	Large increases in general stability for subtilisin BPN' through incremental changes in the free energy of unfolding.	Six individual amino acid substitutions at separate positions in the tertiary structure of subtilisin BPN' (EC 3.4.21.14) were found to increase the stability of this enzyme, as judged by differential scanning calorimetry and decreased rates of thermal inactivation. These stabilizing changes, N218S, G169A, Y217K, M50F, Q206C, and N76D, were discovered through the use of five different investigative approaches: (1) random mutagenesis; (2) design of buried hydrophobic side groups; (3) design of electrostatic interactions at Ca2+ binding sites; (4) sequence homology consensus; and (5) serendipity. Individually, the six amino acid substitutions increase the delta G of unfolding between 0.3 and 1.3 kcal/mol at 58.5 degrees C. The combination of these six individual stabilizing mutations together into one subtilisin BPN' molecule was found to result in approximately independent and additive increases in the delta G of unfolding to give a net increase of 3.8 kcal/mol (58.5 degrees C). Thermodynamic stability was also shown to be related to resistance to irreversible inactivation, which included elevated temperatures (65 degrees C) or extreme alkalinity (pH 12.0). Under these denaturing conditions, the rate of inactivation of the combination variant is approximately 300 times slower than that of the wild-type subtilisin BPN'. A comparison of the 1.8-A-resolution crystal structures of mutant and wild-type enzymes revealed only independent and localized structural changes around the site of the amino acid side group substitutions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
10877847	Chemically prepared hevein domains: effect of C-terminal truncation and the mutagenesis of aromatic residues on the affinity for chitin.	Chemically prepared hevein domains (HDs), N-terminal domain of an antifungal protein from Nicotiana tabacum (CBP20-N) and an antimicrobial peptide from Amaranthus caudatus (Ac-AMP2), were examined for their affinity for chitin, a beta-1,4-linked polymer of N-acetylglucosamine. An intact binding domain, CBP20-N, showed a higher affinity than a C-terminal truncated domain, Ac-AMP2. The formation of a pyroglutamate residue from N-terminal Gln of CBP20-N increased the affinity. The single replacement of any aromatic residue of Ac-AMP2 with Ala resulted in a significant reduction in affinity, suggesting the importance of the complete set of three aromatic residues in the ligand binding site. The mutations of Phe18 of Ac-AMP2 to the residues with larger aromatic rings, i.e. Trp, beta-(1-naphthyl)alanine or beta-(2-naphthyl)alanine, enhanced the affinity, whereas the mutation of Tyr20 to Trp reduced the affinity. The affinity of an HD for chitin might be improved by adjusting the size and substituent group of stacking aromatic rings.
7411611	Gene duplication in glutathione reductase.	null
11264581	Structures and comparison of the Y98H (2.0 A) and Y98W (1.5 A) mutants of flavodoxin (Desulfovibrio vulgaris).	The structures for two mutants at the Tyr98 site of Desulfovibrio vulgaris flavodoxin have been determined. The first, a tyrosine-to-histidine (Y98H) variant, was determined at the moderately high resolution of 2.0 A, while the tyrosine-to-tryptophan variant (Y98W) yielded very high resolution data (beyond 1.5 A) allowing a detailed look at the water structure, alternate side-chain conformations and the planarity of the FMN. Both structures were solved by molecular replacement beginning with the native (P2A) coordinates as a starting point. The Y98H variant of D. vulgaris flavodoxin crystallizes in space group P2(1)2(1)2(1), with unit-cell parameters a = 41.96, b = 61.45, c = 57.04 A, while the Y98W mutant adopts space group P2(1), with a = 41.29, b = 55.82, c = 32.52 A, beta = 100.68 degrees. Refinement for both mutants utilized PROLSQ followed by, for the high-resolution Y98W structure, anisotropic refinement as implemented in SHELXL. Final R factors of 17% for the Y98H mutant and 9.8% for the Y98W mutant were obtained. For the high-resolution (1.5 A) Y98W mutant, 31,010 unique reflections were collected from a single crystal. The final model includes 273 solvent molecules, with eight side chains assuming multiple conformations. At this resolution, the detailed conformation of the FMN can be observed, with both a bow and twist being noted. A comparison is made between the two mutants and the different oxidation states of the native flavodoxin. Although both mutants show similar E(2) (oxidized/semiquinone) one-electron redox potentials to the native, the E(1) (semiquinone/hydroquinone) redox potential for the Y98H mutant is significantly different from that of the Y98W variant and the native protein. The surprising similarity in the folding of the polypeptide chain 60--64 between the two mutants and the reduced states of the native is discussed. The interaction between O61 and N5 in the flavin is discussed because of the new conformation of this loop.
10194298	NMR solution structure of alpha-conotoxin ImI and comparison to other conotoxins specific for neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.	Alpha-Conotoxins, peptides produced by predatory species of Conus marine snails, are potent antagonists of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), ligand-gated ion channels involved in synaptic transmission. We determined the NMR solution structure of the smallest known alpha-conotoxin, ImI, a 12 amino acid peptide that binds specifically to neuronal alpha7-containing nAChRs in mammals. Calculation of the structure was based on a total of 80 upper distance constraints and 31 dihedral angle constraints resulting in 20 representative conformers with an average pairwise rmsd of 0.44 A from the mean structure for the backbone atoms N, Calpha, and C' of residues 2-11. The structure of ImI is characterized by two compact loops, defined by two disulfide bridges, which form distinct subdomains separated by a deep cleft. Two short 310-helical regions in the first loop are followed by a C-terminal beta-turn in the second. The two disulfide bridges and Ala 9 form a rigid hydrophobic core, orienting the other amino acid side chains toward the surface. Comparison of the three-dimensional structure of ImI to those of the larger, 16 amino acid alpha-conotoxins PnIA, PnIB, MII, and EpI-also specific for neuronal nAChRs-reveals remarkable similarity in local backbone conformations and relative solvent-accessible surface areas. The core scaffold is conserved in all five conotoxins, whereas the residues in solvent-exposed positions are highly variable. The second helical region, and the specific amino acids that the helix exposes to solvent, may be particularly important for binding and selectivity. This comparative analysis provides a three-dimensional structural basis for interpretation of mutagenesis data and structure-activity relationships for ImI as well other neuronal alpha-conotoxins.
9354379	Analysis of the stabilization of hen lysozyme by helix macrodipole and charged side chain interaction.	In the N-terminal region of the alpha-helix of the c-type lysozymes, two Asx residues exist at the 18th and 27th positions. Hen lysozyme has Asp18/Asn27 (18D/27N), and we prepared three mutant lysozymes, Asn18/Asn27 (18N/27N), Asn18/Asp27 (18N/27D), and Asp18/Asp27 (18D/27D). The stability of the wild-type (18D/27N) lysozyme supported the existence of a hydrogen bond between the side chain of Asp18 and the amide group at the N1 position in the alpha-helix, while the stability of the 18N/27D lysozyme supported the presence of the capping box between the Ser24 (N-cap) and Asp27 residues. Although electrostatic repulsion was observed between Asp18 and Asp27 residues in 18D/27D lysozyme, the dissociation of each residue contributed to stabilizing the B-helix in 18D/27D lysozyme through hydrogen bonding and charge-helix macrodipole interaction. This is the first evidence that two neighboring negative charges at the N-terminus of the helix both increased the stability of the protein.
8732756	Purification and characterization of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A from Lactococcus lactis, crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction studies of the enzyme.	Lactococcus lactis is the only organism known to contain two dihydroorotate dehydrogenases, i.e., the A- and B-forms. In this paper, we report the overproduction, purification, and crystallization of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A. In solution, the enzyme is bright yellow. It is a dimer of subunits (34 kDa) that contain one molecule of flavin mononucleotide each. The enzyme shows optimal function in the pH range 7.5-9.0. It is specific for L-dihydroorotate as substrate and can use dichlorophenolindophenol, potassium hexacyanoferrate (III), and, to a lower extent, also molecular oxygen as acceptors of the reducing equivalents, whereas the pyridine nucleotide coenzymes (NAD+, NADP+) and the respiratory quinones (i.e., vitamins Q6, Q10 and K2) were inactive. The enzyme has been crystallized from solutions of 30% polyethylene glycol, 0.2 M sodium acetate, and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. The resulting yellow crystals diffracted well and showed little sign of radiation damage during diffraction experiments. The crystals are monoclinic, space group P21 with unit cell dimensions a = 54.19 A, b = 109.23 A, c = 67.17 A, and beta = 104.5 degrees. A native data set has been collected with a completeness of 99.3% to 2.0 A and an Rsym value of 5.2%. Analysis of the solvent content and the self-rotation function indicates that the two subunits in the asymmetric unit are related by a noncrystallographic twofold axis perpendicular to the crystallographic b and c axes.
10508433	Crystallographic analysis of the binding modes of thiazoloisoindolinone non-nucleoside inhibitors to HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and comparison with modeling studies.	We have determined the crystal structures of thiazoloisoindolinone non-nucleoside inhibitors in complex with HIV-1 reverse transcriptase to high-resolution limits of 2.7 A (BM +21.1326) and 2. 52 A (BM +50.0934). We find that the binding modes of this series of inhibitors closely resemble that of "two-ring" non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. The structures allow rationalization of stereochemical requirements, structure-activity data, and drug resistance data. Comparisons with our previous structures suggest modifications to the inhibitors that might improve resilience to drug-resistant mutant forms of reverse transcriptase. Comparison with earlier modeling studies reveals that the predicted overlap of thiazoloisoindolinones with TIBO was largely correct, while that with nevirapine was significantly different.
2993920	Structure of a human common cold virus and functional relationship to other picornaviruses.	We report the first atomic resolution structure of an animal virus, human rhinovirus 14. It is strikingly similar to known icosahedral plant RNA viruses. Four neutralizing immunogenic regions have been identified. These, and corresponding antigenic sequences of polio and foot-and-mouth disease viruses, reside on external protrusions. A large cleft on each icosahedral face is probably the host cell receptor binding site.
8008071	Three-dimensional structure of beta-galactosidase from E. coli.	The beta-galactosidase from Escherichia coli was instrumental in the development of the operon model, and today is one of the most commonly used enzymes in molecular biology. Here we report the structure of this protein and show that it is a tetramer with 222-point symmetry. The 1,023-amino-acid polypeptide chain folds into five sequential domains, with an extended segment at the amino terminus. The participation of this amino-terminal segment in a subunit interface, coupled with the observation that each active site is made up of elements from two different subunits, provides a structural rationale for the phenomenon of alpha-complementation. The structure represents the longest polypeptide chain for which an atomic structure has been determined. Our results show that it is possible successfully to study non-viral protein crystals with unit cell dimensions in excess of 500 A and with relative molecular masses in the region of 2,000K per asymmetric unit. Non-crystallographic symmetry averaging proved to be a very powerful tool in the structure determination, as has been shown in other contexts.
12351824	Structural analysis of the two horseradish peroxidase catalytic residue variants H42E and R38S/H42E: implications for the catalytic cycle.	The crystal structures of horseradish peroxidase C (HRPC) active-site mutants H42E and R38S/H42E co-crystallized with benzhydroxamic acid (BHA) and ferulic acid (FA), respectively, have been solved. The 2.5 A crystal structure of the H42E-BHA complex reveals that the side-chain O atoms of Glu42 occupy positions that are very similar to the positions of the two side-chain N atoms of the distal histidine in the wild-type HRPC-BHA structure. The mutation disturbs the hydrogen-bonding network extending from residue 42 to the distal calcium ion and results in the absence of the water molecule that is usually ligated to this ion in plant peroxidases. Consequently, the distal calcium ion is six- rather than seven-coordinated. In the 2.0 A R38S/H42E structure the position of Glu42 is different and no FA is observed in the distal haem pocket. This is a consequence of the absence of the Arg38 side chain, which limits the flexibility of the Glu42 side chain and modulates its acidity, making it unsuitable as a general acid-base catalyst in the reaction cycle. The water ligated to the distal calcium ion is present, showing that the wild-type distal hydrogen-bonding network is preserved. These results show why a glutamic acid residue can substitute for the conserved distal histidine in HRPC and that Arg38 plays a significant role in controlling the positioning and ionization state of the residue at position 42. Furthermore, these structures indicate that changes in the distal cavity are conveyed through the distal hydrogen-bonding network to the distal calcium site.
10841779	Catalytic cysteine of thymidylate synthase is activated upon substrate binding.	The role of Ser 167 of Escherichia coli thymidylate synthase (TS) in catalysis has been characterized by kinetic and crystallographic studies. Position 167 variants including S167A, S167N, S167D, S167C, S167G, S167L, S167T, and S167V were generated by site-directed mutagenesis. Only S167A, S167G, S167T, and S167C complemented the growth of thymidine auxotrophs of E. coli in medium lacking thymidine. Steady-state kinetic analysis revealed that mutant enzymes exhibited k(cat) values 1.1-95-fold lower than that of the wild-type enzyme. Relative to wild-type TS, K(m) values of the mutant enzymes for 2'-deoxyuridylate (dUMP) were 5-90 times higher, while K(m) values for 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH(2)H(4)folate) were 1.5-16-fold higher. The rate of dehalogenation of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine 5'-monophosphate (BrdUMP), a reaction catalyzed by TS that does not require CH(2)H(4)folate as cosubstrate, by mutant TSs was analyzed and showed that only S167A and S167G catalyzed the dehalogenation reaction and values of k(cat)/K(m) for the mutant enzymes were decreased by 10- and 3000-fold, respectively. Analysis of pre-steady-state kinetics of ternary complex formation revealed that the productive binding of CH(2)H(4)folate is weaker to mutant TSs than to the wild-type enzyme. Chemical transformation constants (k(chem)) for the mutant enzymes were lower by 1.1-6.0-fold relative to the wild-type enzyme. S167A, S167T, and S167C crystallized in the I2(1)3 space group and scattered X-rays to either 1.7 A (S167A and S167T) or 2.6 A (S167C). The high-resolution data sets were refined to a R(crys) of 19.9%. In the crystals some cysteine residues were derivatized with 2-mercaptoethanol to form S,S-(2-hydroxyethyl)thiocysteine. The pattern of derivatization indicates that in the absence of bound substrate the catalytic cysteine is not more reactive than other cysteines. It is proposed that the catalytic cysteine is activated by substrate binding by a proton-transfer mechanism in which the phosphate group of the nucleotide neutralizes the charge of Arg 126', facilitating the transfer of a proton from the catalytic cysteine to a His 207-Asp 205 diad via a system of ordered water molecules.
12554939	Use of multiple anomalous dispersion to phase highly merohedrally twinned crystals of interleukin-1beta.	The crystal structure at 1.54 A resolution of a double mutant of interleukin-1beta (F42W/W120F), a cytokine secreted by macrophages, was determined by multiple-wavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) using data from highly twinned selenomethionine-modified crystals. The space group is P4(3), with unit-cell parameters a = b = 53.9, c = 77.4 A. Self-rotation function analysis and various intensity statistics revealed the presence of merohedral twinning in crystals of both the native (twinning fraction alpha approximately 0.35) and SeMet (alpha approximately 0.40) forms. Structure determination and refinement are discussed with emphasis on the possible reasons for successful phasing using untreated twinned MAD data.
7607478	Crystal structure of the PvuII restriction endonuclease.	Crystal structures have now been determined for the R.PvuII restriction endonuclease as a protein-DNA complex [Cheng et al., EMBO J. 13 (1994) 3927-3935; this report] and in apo-form [Athanasiadis et al., Nature Struc. Biol. 1 (1994) 469-475; our unpublished result]. The structures indicate how the interaction with DNA might proceed [Riddihough, Nature 370 (1994) 78].
2033075	Molecular cloning of matrin 3. A 125-kilodalton protein of the nuclear matrix contains an extensive acidic domain.	We report here the cloning and sequencing of matrin 3, an acidic internal matrix protein, from a rat insuloma cDNA library. The nucleotide sequence has a single open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 845 amino acids. The Genbank and National Biomedical Research Foundation databases did not contain any sequences similar to that of matrin 3. The primary structure consists of 33% charged residues and is generally hydrophilic. The amino-terminal region (residues 1-120) is positively charged and contains a large number of amino acids with free hydroxyl groups (26 of the first 100 residues) as in the lamins and several non-lamin intermediate filament proteins. A highly acidic domain (approximately 170 amino acids) near the carboxyl terminus, in which 32% of the amino acid residues are acidic (Glu or Asp), is a characteristic found in other nuclear proteins (Earnshaw, W. C. (1987) J. Cell Biol. 105, 1479-1482). A putative nuclear targeting signal sequence (Ser-Lys-Lys-Lys-Leu-Lys-Lys-Val-Glu) is located in the middle of the highly acidic domain. The corresponding human deduced partial amino acid sequence is 96% identical to the rat sequence, indicating that matrin 3 is a highly conserved protein.
9346243	Structure of the substrate binding domain of the thermosome, an archaeal group II chaperonin.	The crystal structure of the substrate binding domain of the thermosome, the archaeal group II chaperonin, has been determined at 2.3 A resolution. The core resembles the apical domain of GroEL but lacks the hydrophobic residues implied in binding of substrates to group I chaperonins. Rather, a large hydrophobic surface patch is found in a novel helix-turn-helix motif, which is characteristic of all group II chaperonins including the eukaryotic TRiC/CCT complex. Models of the holochaperonin, which are consistent with cryo electron microscopy data, suggest a dual role of this helical protrusion in substrate binding and controlling access to the central cavity independent of a GroES-like cochaperonin.
1752442	Efficient association of U2 snRNPs with pre-mRNA requires an essential U2 RNA structural element.	To understand the role of U2 RNA structure in pre-mRNA splicing we have characterized several cold-sensitive mutations in an essential stem-loop of yeast U2. Although mutant U2 is stable in vivo after a shift to restrictive temperature, splicing is rapidly inhibited, suggesting a direct effect on U2 function rather than U2 synthesis or snRNP assembly. Splicing complexes form at 23 degrees C in both mutant and wild-type extracts; however, stable association of mutant U2 snRNPs with pre-mRNA in vitro is inefficient at 15 degrees C, a temperature permissive for spliceosome assembly in wild-type extracts, indicating that the cold-sensitive defect is in U2 snRNP association with the assembling spliceosome. In vivo RNA structure probing reveals that the bulk of U2 RNA is misfolded in the mutants, even at permissive temperature. We propose that U2 stem-loop IIa is recognized by an assembly factor that assists U2 snRNP binding to pre-mRNA and that the cold sensitivity is due to a critical deficiency of correctly folded U2 for spliceosome assembly at low temperatures. Evolutionary conservation of the potential to form an interfering alternative RNA structure suggests the possibility that splicing could be regulated negatively at an early step by control of U2 snRNA conformation.
11148029	Strain is more important than electrostatic interaction in controlling the pKa of the catalytic group in aspartate aminotransferase.	Systematic single and multiple replacement studies have been applied to Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase to probe the electrostatic effect of the two substrate-binding arginine residues, Arg292 and Arg386, and the structural effect of the pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-Asn194-Arg386 hydrogen-bond linkage system (PLP-N-R) on the pK(a) value of the Schiff base formed between pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) and Lys258. The electrostatic effects of the two arginine residues cannot be assessed by simple mutational studies of the residues. PLP-N-R lowers the pK(a) value of the PLP-Lys258 Schiff base by keeping it in the distorted conformation, which is unfavorable for protonation. Mutation of Arg386 eliminates its hydrogen bond with Asn194 and partially disrupts PLP-N-R, thereby relaxing the strain of the Schiff base. On the other hand, mutation of Arg292, the large domain residue that interacts with the small domain residue Asp15, makes the domain opening easier. Because PLP-N-R lies between the two domains, the domain opening increases the strain of the Schiff base. Therefore, the true electrostatic effects of Arg292 and Arg386 could be derived from mutational analysis of the enzyme in which PLP-N-R had been completely disrupted by the Asn194Ala mutation. Through the analyses, we could dissect the electrostatic and structural effects of the arginine mutations on the Schiff base pK(a). The positive charges of the two arginine residues and the PLP-N-R-mediated strain of the Schiff base lower the Schiff base pK(a) by 0.7 and 1.7, respectively. Thus, the electrostatic effect of the arginine residues is not as strong as has historically been thought, and this finding substantiates our recent finding that the imine-pyridine torsion of the Schiff base is the primary determinant (2.8 unit decrease) of the extremely low pK(a) value of the Schiff base [Hayashi, H., Mizuguchi, H., and Kagamiyama, H. (1998) Biochemistry 37, 15076-15085].
1631098	Structures of apo and complexed Escherichia coli glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase.	The three-dimensional structure of phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase (10-formyltetrahydrofolate:5'-phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase, EC 2.1.2.2) has been solved both as an apoenzyme at 2.8-A resolution and as a ternary complex with the substrate glycinamide ribonucleotide and a folate inhibitor at 2.5-A resolution. The structure is a modified doubly wound alpha/beta sheet with flexibility in the active site, including a disordered loop in the apo structure, which is ordered in the ternary complex structure. This enzyme is a target for anti-cancer therapy and now for structure-based drug design.
9687370	Crystal structure of the C2 domain from protein kinase C-delta.	BACKGROUND: The protein kinase C (PKC) family of lipid-dependent serine/theonine kinases plays a central role in many intracellular eukaryotic signalling events. Members of the novel (delta, epsilon, eta, theta) subclass of PKC isotypes lack the Ca2+ dependence of the conventional PKC isotypes and have an N-terminal C2 domain, originally defined as V0 (variable domain zero). Biochemical data suggest that this domain serves to translocate novel PKC family members to the plasma membrane and may influence binding of PKC activators. RESULTS: The crystal structure of PKC-delta C2 domain indicates an unusual variant of the C2 fold. Structural elements unique to this C2 domain include a helix and a protruding beta hairpin which may contribute basic sequences to a membrane-interaction site. The invariant C2 motif, Pro-X-Trp, where X is any amino acid, forms a short crossover loop, departing radically from its conformation in other C2 structures, and contains a tyrosine phosphorylation site unique to PKC-delta. This loop and two others adopt quite different conformations from the equivalent Ca(2+)-binding loops of phospholipase C-delta and synaptotagmin I, and lack sequences necessary for Ca2+ coordination. CONCLUSIONS: The N-terminal sequence of Ca(2+)-independent novel PKCs defines a divergent example of a C2 structure similar to that of phospholipase C-delta. The Ca(2+)-independent regulation of novel PKCs is explained by major structural and sequence differences resulting in three non-functional Ca(2+)-binding loops. The observed structural variation and position of a tyrosine-phosphorylation site suggest the existence of distinct subclasses of C2-like domains which may have evolved distinct functional roles and mechanisms to interact with lipid membranes.
10653632	Dissection of malonyl-coenzyme A decarboxylation from polyketide formation in the reaction mechanism of a plant polyketide synthase.	Chalcone synthase (CHS) catalyzes formation of the phenylpropanoid chalcone from one p-coumaroyl-CoA and three malonyl-coenzyme A (CoA) thioesters. The three-dimensional structure of CHS [Ferrer, J.-L., Jez, J. M., Bowman, M. E., Dixon, R. A., and Noel, J. P. (1999) Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 775-784] suggests that four residues (Cys164, Phe215, His303, and Asn336) participate in the multiple decarboxylation and condensation reactions catalyzed by this enzyme. Here, we functionally characterize 16 point mutants of these residues for chalcone production, malonyl-CoA decarboxylation, and the ability to bind CoA and acetyl-CoA. Our results confirm Cys164's role as the active-site nucleophile in polyketide formation and elucidate the importance of His303 and Asn336 in the malonyl-CoA decarboxylation reaction. We suggest that Phe215 may help orient substrates at the active site during elongation of the polyketide intermediate. To better understand the structure-function relationships in some of these mutants, we also determined the crystal structures of the CHS C164A, H303Q, and N336A mutants refined to 1.69, 2.0, and 2.15 A resolution, respectively. The structure of the C164A mutant reveals that the proposed oxyanion hole formed by His303 and Asn336 remains undisturbed, allowing this mutant to catalyze malonyl-CoA decarboxylation without chalcone formation. The structures of the H303Q and N336A mutants support the importance of His303 and Asn336 in polarizing the thioester carbonyl of malonyl-CoA during the decarboxylation reaction. In addition, both of these residues may also participate in stabilizing the tetrahedral transition state during polyketide elongation. Conservation of the catalytic functions of the active-site residues may occur across a wide variety of condensing enzymes, including other polyketide and fatty acid synthases.
9446593	The solution structure and dynamics of the pleckstrin homology domain of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 1). A binding partner of Gbetagamma subunits.	The solution structure of an extended pleckstrin homology (PH) domain from the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase is obtained by high resolution NMR. The structure establishes that the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase extended PH domain has the same fold and topology as other PH domains, and there are several unique features, most notably an extended C-terminal alpha-helix that behaves as a molten helix, and a surface charge polarity that is extensively modified by positive residues in the extended alpha-helix and the C terminus. These observations complement biochemical evidence that the C-terminal portion of this PH domain participates in protein-protein interactions with Gbetagamma subunits. This suggests that the C-terminal segment of the PH domain may function to mediate protein-protein interactions with the targets of PH domains.
8648598	Complexes of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase with inhibitors of the HEPT series reveal conformational changes relevant to the design of potent non-nucleoside inhibitors.	Crystal structures of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) complexed with a range of chemically diverse non-nucleoside inhibitors (NNIs) have shown a single pocket in which the inhibitors bind and details of the inhibitor-protein interactions. To delineate the structural requirements for an effective inhibitor, we have determined the structures of three closely related NNIs which vary widely in their potencies. Crystal structures of HIV-1 RT complexed with two very potent inhibitors, MKC-442 and TNK-651, at 2.55 angstroms resolution complement our previous analysis of the complex with the less effective inhibitor, HEPT. These structures reveal conformational changes which correlate with changes in potency. We suggest that a major determinant of increased potency in the analogues of HEPT is an improved interaction between residue Tyr181 in the protein and the 6-benzyl ring of the inhibitors which stabilizes the structure of the complex. This arises through a conformational switching of the protein structure triggered by the steric bulk of the 5-substituent of the inhibitor pyrimidine ring.
2148648	Stable, monomeric variants of lambda Cro obtained by insertion of a designed beta-hairpin sequence.	lambda Cro is a dimeric DNA binding protein. Random mutagenesis and a selection for Cro activity have been used to identify the contacts between Cro subunits that are crucial for maintenance of a stably folded structure. To obtain equivalent contacts in a monomeric system, a Cro variant was designed and constructed in which the antiparallel beta-ribbon that forms the dimer interface was replaced by a beta-hairpin. The engineered monomer has a folded structure similar to wild type, is significantly more stable than wild type, and exhibits novel half-operator binding activity.
8736558	The solution structure of human thioredoxin complexed with its target from Ref-1 reveals peptide chain reversal.	BACKGROUND: Human thioredoxin (hTRX) is a 12 kDa cellular redox protein that has been shown to play an important role in the activation of a number of transcriptional and translational regulators via a thiol-redox mechanism. This activity may be direct or indirect via another redox protein known as Ref-1. The structure of a complex of hTRX with a peptide comprising its target from the transcription factor NF kappa B has previously been solved. To further extend our knowledge of the recognition by and interaction of hTRX with its various targets, we have studied a complex between hTRX and a Ref-1 peptide. This complex represents a kinetically stable mixed disulfide intermediate along the reaction pathway. RESULTS: Using multidimensional heteronuclear edited and filtered NMR spectroscopy, we have solved the solution structure of a complex between hTRX and a 13-residue peptide comprising residues 59-71 of Ref-1. The Ref-1 peptide is located in a crescent-shaped groove on the surface of hTRX, the groove being formed by residues in the active-site loop (residues 32-36), helix 3, beta strands 3 and 5, and the loop between beta strands 3 and 4. The complex is stabilized by numerous hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic interactions that involve residues 61-69 of the peptide and confer substrate specificity. CONCLUSIONS: The orientation of the Ref-1 peptide in the hTRX-Ref-1 complex is opposite to that found in the previously solved complex of hTRX with the target peptide from the transcription factor NF kappa B. Orientation is determined by three discriminating interactions involving the nature of the residues at the P-2' P-4 and P-5 binding positions. (P0 defines the active cysteine of the peptide, Cys65 for Ref-1 and Cys62 for NF kappa B. Positive and negative numbers indicate residues N-terminal and C-terminal to this residue, respectively, and vice versa for NF kappa B as it binds in the opposite orientation.) The environment surrounding the reactive Cys32 of hTRX, as well as the packing of the P+3 to P-4 residues are essentially the same in the two complexes, despite the opposing orientation of the peptide chains. This versatility in substrate recognition permits hTRX to act as a wide-ranging redox regulator for the cell.
8392729	Structure determination of feline panleukopenia virus empty particles.	Various crystal forms of the single-stranded DNA, feline panleukopenia virus (FPV), a parvovirus, have been grown of both full virions and empty particles. The structure of empty particles crystallized in an orthorhombic space group P2(1)2(1)2(1), with unit cell dimensions a = 380.1 A, b = 379.3 A, and c = 350.9 A, has been determined to 3.3 A resolution. The data were collected using oscillation photography with synchrotron radiation. The orientations of the empty capsids in the unit cell were determined using a self-rotation function and their positions were obtained with an R-factor search using canine parvovirus (CPV) as a model. Phases were then calculated, based on the CPV model, to 6.0 A resolution and gradually extended to 3.3 A resolution by molecular replacement electron density averaging. The resultant electron density was readily interpreted in terms of the known amino acid sequence. The structure is contrasted to that of CPV in terms of host range, neutralization by antibodies, hemagglutination properties, and binding of genomic DNA.
11031266	Structures of prolyl oligopeptidase substrate/inhibitor complexes. Use of inhibitor binding for titration of the catalytic histidine residue.	Structure determination of the inactive S554A variant of prolyl oligopeptidase complexed with an octapeptide has shown that substrate binding is restricted to the P4-P2' region. In addition, it has revealed a hydrogen bond network of potential catalytic importance not detected in other serine peptidases. This involves a unique intramolecular hydrogen bond between the P1' amide and P2 carbonyl groups and another between the P2' amide and Nepsilon2 of the catalytic histidine 680 residue. It is argued that both hydrogen bonds promote proton transfer from the imidazolium ion to the leaving group. Another complex formed with the product-like inhibitor benzyloxycarbonyl-glycyl-proline, indicating that the carboxyl group of the inhibitor forms a hydrogen bond with the Nepsilon2 of His(680). Because a protonated histidine makes a stronger interaction with the carboxyl group, it offers a possibility of the determination of the real pK(a) of the catalytic histidine residue. This was found to be 6.25, lower than that of the well studied serine proteases. The new titration method gave a single pK(a) for prolyl oligopeptidase, whose reaction exhibited a complex pH dependence for k(cat)/K(m), and indicated that the observed pK(a) values are apparent. The procedure presented may be applicable for other serine peptidases.
11069910	Roles of active site and novel K+ ion-binding site residues in human mitochondrial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase.	The human mitochondrial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase (BCKD) is a heterotetrameric (alpha(2)beta(2)) thiamine diphosphate (TDP)-dependent enzyme. The recently solved human BCKD structure at 2.7 A showed that the two TDP-binding pockets are located at the interfaces between alpha and beta' subunits and between alpha' and beta subunits. In the present study, we show that the E76A-beta' mutation results in complete inactivation of BCKD. The result supports the catalytic role of the invariant Glu-76-beta' residue in increasing basicity of the N-4' amino group during the proton abstraction from the C-2 atom on the thiazolium ring. A substitution of His-146-beta' with Ala also renders the enzyme completely inactive. The data are consistent with binding of the alpha-ketoacid substrate by this residue based on the Pseudomonas BCKD structure. Alterations in Asn-222-alpha, Tyr-224-alpha, or Glu-193-alpha, which coordinates to the Mg(2+) ion, result in an inactive enzyme (E193A-alpha) or a mutant BCKD with markedly higher K(m) for TDP and a reduced level of the bound cofactor (Y224A-alpha and N222S-alpha). Arg-114-alpha, Arg-220-alpha, and His-291-alpha interact with TDP by directly binding to phosphate oxygens of the cofactor. We show that natural mutations of these residues in maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) patients (R114W-alpha and R220W-alpha) or site-directed mutagenesis (H291A-alpha) also result in an inactive or partially active enzyme, respectively. Another MSUD mutation (T166M-alpha), which affects one of the residues that coordinate to the K(+) ion on the alpha subunit, also causes inactivation of the enzyme and an attenuated ability to bind TDP. In addition, fluorescence measurements establish that Trp-136-beta in human BCKD is the residue quenched by TDP binding. Thus, our results define the functional roles of key amino acid residues in human BCKD and provide a structural basis for MSUD.
7687065	Crystal structure of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase complexed with double-stranded DNA at 3.0 A resolution shows bent DNA.	The crystal structure of a ternary complex of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT) heterodimer (p66/p51), a 19-base/18-base double-stranded DNA template-primer, and a monoclonal antibody Fab fragment has been determined at 3.0 A resolution. The four individual subdomains of RT that make up the polymerase domains of p66 and p51 are named fingers, palm, thumb, and connection [Kohlstaedt, L. A., Wang, J., Friedman, J. M., Rice, P. A. & Steitz, T. A. (1992) Science 256, 1783-1790]. The overall folding of the subdomains is similar in p66 and p51 but the spatial arrangements of the subdomains are dramatically different. The template-primer has A-form and B-form regions separated by a significant bend (40-45 degrees). The most numerous nucleic acid interactions with protein occur primarily along the sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA and involve amino acid residues of the palm, thumb, and fingers of p66. Highly conserved regions are located in the p66 palm near the polymerase active site. These structural elements, together with two alpha-helices of the thumb of p66, act as a clamp to position the template-primer relative to the polymerase active site. The 3'-hydroxyl of the primer terminus is close to the catalytically essential Asp-110, Asp-185, and Asp-186 residues at the active site and is in a position for nucleophilic attack on the alpha-phosphate of an incoming nucleoside triphosphate. The structure of the HIV-1 RT/DNA/Fab complex should aid our understanding of general mechanisms of nucleic acid polymerization. AIDS therapies may be enhanced by a fuller understanding of drug inhibition and resistance emerging from these studies.
7776369	Towards structure-based drug design: crystal structure of a multisubstrate adduct complex of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase at 1.96 A resolution.	An inhibitor complex structure of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GAR-Tfase; EC 2.1.2.2) from Escherichia coli has been determined with a multisubstrate adduct BW1476U89 to an R-value of 19.1% at 1.96 A resolution. The structure was determined by a combination of molecular and single isomorphous replacement using data from two different monoclinic crystal lattices and collecting data from crystals soaked in 20% (w/v) methyl-pentanediol as cryoprotectant for shock-freezing at -150 degrees C. The multisubstrate adduct is bound in an extended crevice at the interface between the two functional domains of the enzyme. This inhibitor is positioned in the binding site by three sets of tight interactions with its phosphate, glutamate and pyrimidone ring moieties, while its interventing linker atoms are more flexible and adopt two distinct sets of conformations. The highly conserved Arg103, His108 and Gln170 residues that are key in ligand binding and catalysis (His108), have compensatory conformational variation that gives some clues as to their role in substrate specificity and in the formyl transfer. The molecular design of 1476U89 as a multisubstrate adduct inhibitor (Ki approximately 100 pM at pH 8.5), is confirmed as it closely mimics the shape, molecular interaction and combined binding constants of the natural 10-formyltetrahydrofolate (10-CHO-H4F; Km approximately 77.4 microM at pH 8.5) and glycinamide-ribonucleotide (GAR; Km approximately 8.1 microM at pH 8.5) substrates. The stereochemistry of this ligand complex suggests that His108 may act as an electrophile stabilizing the oxyanion of the tetrahedral intermediate that is formed as a result of the direct attack on the 10-CHO-H4F by the amino group of GAR. Structural comparison of the folate binding modes among GAR-Tfase, dihydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase reveals that folate derivates bound to GAR-Tfase differentially adopt the trans conformation for the dihedral angle between atoms C-6 and C-9 providing a handle for targeting specific folate-dependent enzymes. The structural information derived from two different discrete conformations of the ligand in the binding site also suggests several leads for the de novo design of inhibitors of GAR-Tfase that may develop into useful chemotherapeutic agents.
8987980	Elimination of the hydrolytic water molecule in a class A beta-lactamase mutant: crystal structure and kinetics.	Two site-directed mutant enzymes of the class A beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 were produced with the goal of blocking the site that in the native enzyme is occupied by the proposed hydrolytic water molecule. The crystal structures of these two mutant enzymes, N170Q and N170M, have been determined and refined at 2.2 and 2.0 A, respectively. They reveal that the side chain of Gln 170 displaces the water molecule, whereas that of Met170 does not. In both cases, the catalytic rates with benzylpenicillin are reduced by 10(4) compared with the native enzyme. With nitrocefin, the N170Q mutant enzyme exhibits an approximately 800-fold reduced rate compared with the native enzyme and in addition, a fast initial burst with stoichiometry of 1 mol of degraded nitrocefin/mol of enzyme. Stopped-flow kinetic experiments establish that the rate constant of the burst is 250 s-1, a value comparable with the rate of acylation of the native enzyme. Two structurally based mechanisms that explain the kinetic properties of the N170Q beta-lactamase are proposed, both invoking a deacylation-impaired enzyme due to the elimination of the hydrolytic water molecule. The catalytic rate of the N170M mutant enzyme with nitrocefin is reduced by approximately 50-fold compared with the native enzyme, and the slow progressive inhibition that is revealed indicates that the hydrolysis proceeds via a branched pathway mechanism. This is consistent with the structural data that show that the water site is preserved and that Met170 occupies part of the space that is required for substrate binding. The short contacts between the substrate and the enzyme may lead to structure perturbation and inactivation.
599565	Structure of the semiquinone form of flavodoxin from Clostridum MP. Extension of 1.8 A resolution and some comparisons with the oxidized state.	null
15522303	Dissecting and designing inhibitor selectivity determinants at the S1 site using an artificial Ala190 protease (Ala190 uPA).	A site-directed mutant of the serine protease urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA), was produced to assess the contribution of the Ser190 side-chain to the affinity and selectivity of lead uPA inhibitors in the absence of other differences present in comparisons of natural proteases. Crystallography and enzymology involving WT and Ala190 uPA were used to calculate free energy binding contributions of hydrogen bonds involving the Ser190 hydroxyl group (O(gamma)(Ser190)) responsible for the remarkable selectivity of 6-halo-5-amidinoindole and 6-halo-5-amidinobenzimidazole inhibitors toward uPA and against natural Ala190 protease anti-targets. Crystal structures of uPA complexes of novel, active site-directed arylguanidine and 2-aminobenzimidazole inhibitors of WT uPA, together with associated K(i) values for WT and Ala190 uPA, also indicate a significant role of Ser190 in the binding of these classes of uPA inhibitors. Structures and associated K(i) values for a lead inhibitor (CA-11) bound to uPA and to five other proteases, as well as for other leads bound to multiple proteases, help reveal the features responsible for the potency (K(i)=11nM) and selectivity of the remarkably small inhibitor, CA-11. The 6-fluoro-5-amidinobenzimidzole, CA-11, is more than 1000-fold selective against natural Ala190 protease anti-targets, and more than 100-fold selective against other Ser190 anti-targets.
16288913	Asp79 makes a large, unfavorable contribution to the stability of RNase Sa.	The two most buried carboxyl groups in ribonuclease Sa (RNase Sa) are Asp33 (99% buried; pK 2.4) and Asp79 (85% buried; pK 7.4). Above these pK values, the stability of the D33A variant is 6kcal/mol less than wild-type RNase Sa, and the stability of the D79A variant is 3.3kcal/mol greater than wild-type RNase Sa. The key structural difference between the carboxyl groups is that Asp33 forms three intramolecular hydrogen bonds, and Asp79 forms no intramolecular hydrogen bond. Here, we focus on Asp79 and describe studies of 11 Asp79 variants. Most of the variants were at least 2kcal/mol more stable than wild-type RNase Sa, and the most interesting was D79F. At pH 3, below the pK of Asp79, RNase Sa is 0.3kcal/mol more stable than the D79F variant. At pH 8.5, above the pK of Asp79, RNase Sa is 3.7kcal/mol less stable than the D79F variant. The unfavorable contribution of Asp79 to the stability appears to result from the Born self-energy of burying the charge and, more importantly, from unfavorable charge-charge interactions. To counteract the effect of the negative charge on Asp79, we prepared the Q94K variant and the crystal structure showed that the amino group of the Lys formed a hydrogen-bonded ion pair (distance, 2.71A; angle, 100 degrees ) with the carboxyl group of Asp79. The stability of the Q94K variant was about the same as the wild-type at pH 3, where Asp79 is uncharged, but 1kcal/mol greater than that of wild-type RNase Sa at pH 8.5, where Asp79 is charged. Differences in hydrophobicity, steric strain, Born self-energy, and electrostatic interactions all appear to contribute to the range of stabilities observed in the variants. When it is possible, replacing buried, non-hydrogen bonded, ionizable side-chains with non-polar side-chains is an excellent means of increasing protein stability.
9558361	Chemical rescue of Klebsiella aerogenes urease variants lacking the carbamylated-lysine nickel ligand.	Klebsiella aerogenes urease possesses a dinuclear metallocenter in which two nickel atoms are bridged by carbamylated Lys217. To assess whether carbamate-specific chemistry is required for urease activity, site-directed mutagenesis and chemical rescue strategies were combined in efforts to place a carboxylate group at the location of this metal ligand. Urease variants with Lys217 replaced by Glu, Cys, and Ala (K217E, K217C/C319A, and K217A proteins) were purified, shown to be activated by incubation with small organic acids plus Ni(II), and structurally characterized. K217C/C319A urease possessed a second change in which Cys319 was replaced by Ala in order to facilitate efforts to chemically modify Cys217; however, this covalent modification approach did not produce active urease. Chemical rescue of the K217E, K217C/C319A, and K217A variants required 2, 2, and 10 h, respectively, to reach maximal activity levels. The highest activity generated [224 micromol of urea degraded.min-1.(mg of protein)-1, for K217C/C319A urease incubated with 500 mM formic acid and 10 mM Ni at pH 6.5] corresponded to 56% of that measured for in vitro activation of the wild-type apoprotein. While the K217E apoprotein showed minimal structural perturbations, the K217C/C319A apoprotein showed a disordering of some active site residues, and the K217A apoprotein revealed a repositioning of His219 to allow the formation of a hydrogen bond with Thr169, thus replacing the hydrogen bond between the amino group of Lys217 and Thr169 in the native enzyme. Importantly, these structures allow rationalization of the relative rates and yields of chemical rescue experiments. The crystal structures of chemically rescued K217A and K217C/C319A ureases revealed a return of the active site residues to their wild-type positions. In both cases, noncovalently bound formate was structurally equivalent to the Lys-carbamate as the bridging metallocenter ligand. We conclude that carbamate-specific chemistry is not required for urease catalysis.
10764577	Structure of the CAD domain of caspase-activated DNase and interaction with the CAD domain of its inhibitor.	Caspase-activated DNase (CAD), which causes a genome fragmentation at the final stage of apoptosis, is a protein of about 40 kDa and exists as a complex form with the inhibitor ICAD in living cells. There is sequence homology of about 80 amino acid residues at the N termini of CAD and ICAD (called the CAD domain). Here, we report the three-dimensional structure of the CAD domain of CAD determined by multi-dimensional NMR spectroscopy and the property of CAD domains investigated by a surface plasmon resonance experiment. The CAD domain of CAD is an independently folded domain composed of one alpha-helix and five beta-strands forming a single sheet. The overall structure is categorized in the ubiquitin superfold. This domain can bind strongly to the isolated CAD domain of ICAD (dissociation constant: 5.48(+/-0.003)x10(-8) M). It suggests the function of the CAD domains in the CAD-ICAD system, that the protein-protein interaction through the CAD domains plays an important role in the inhibition of CAD DNase activity and in the correct folding of CAD. On the basis of structural comparison with other protein complexes containing the ubiquitin superfold, the interaction mode of the CAD domains is proposed.
8206995	A nicotinic acetylcholine receptor ligand of unique specificity, alpha-conotoxin ImI.	We report the isolation, characterization, and total synthesis of a small peptide ligand for nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). It is highly active against the neuromuscular receptor in frog but not in mice. In contrast, it induces seizures when injected centrally in mice and rats, suggesting that it may target neuronal nAChRs in mammals. Although such receptors may be important in both normal cognition and the pathophysiology of several neuropsychiatric disorders, there are few ligands to discriminate between the multiple receptor subtypes. The new peptide is a highly divergent alpha-conotoxin from the snail Conus imperialis, which preys on polychaete worms. In this article, the purification, structural analysis, synthesis, and preliminary physiological characterization of alpha-conotoxin ImI (alpha-CTx-ImI) are reported. The sequence of the peptide is: Gly-Cys-Cys-Ser-Asp-Pro-Arg-Cys-Ala-Trp-Arg-Cys-NH2. The peptide shows striking sequence differences from all alpha-conotoxins of fish-hunting Conus, but its disulfide-bridging is similar: [2-8; 3-12]. We suggest that cone venoms may provide an array of ligands with selectivity for various neuronal nAChR subtypes.
488354	The C-terminal fragment of human glutathione reductase contains the postulated catalytic histidine.	null
8706698	A site-directed mutagenesis study of Saccharomyces cerevisiae pyrophosphatase. Functional conservation of the active site of soluble inorganic pyrophosphatases.	We report the expression and initial characterization of 19 active-site variants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPase), including measurements of thermostability, oligomeric structure and specific activity at pH 7.2. 13 of the 19 conservative substitutions resulted in at least a fivefold decrease in activity, indicating that these residues are important for yeast PPase catalysis. The E58D, D117E, D120E and D152E variants had no activity under the conditions tested, suggesting that Glu58, Asp117, Asp120 and Asp152 may have crucial roles in catalysis. The effects of the mutations on catalytic activity were very similar to those observed with the corresponding variants of Escherichia coli PPase, proving conclusively that the active site and mechanism of soluble PPases are conserved. The D71E variant was more thermostable and the K56R, R78K, D115E and K154R variants were more thermolabile than the wild-type enzyme, whereas subunit:subunit interactions were somewhat weakened by the K56R, R78K, Y89F and K154R substitutions. These results suggest that Lys56, Asp71, Arg78, Tyr89, Asp115 and Lys154 are structurally important for yeast PPase.
15684414	The crystal structure of the outer membrane protein VceC from the bacterial pathogen Vibrio cholerae at 1.8 A resolution.	Multidrug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria arises in part from the activities of tripartite drug efflux pumps. In the pathogen Vibrio cholerae, one such pump comprises the inner membrane proton antiporter VceB, the periplasmic adaptor VceA, and the outer membrane channel VceC. Here, we report the crystal structure of VceC at 1.8 A resolution. The trimeric VceC is organized in the crystal lattice within laminar arrays that resemble membranes. A well resolved detergent molecule within this array interacts with the transmembrane beta-barrel domain in a fashion that may mimic protein-lipopolysaccharide contacts. Our analyses of the external surfaces of VceC and other channel proteins suggest that different classes of efflux pumps have distinct architectures. We discuss the implications of these findings for mechanisms of drug and protein export.
11689936	Chemistry of ion coordination and hydration revealed by a K+ channel-Fab complex at 2.0 A resolution.	Ion transport proteins must remove an ion's hydration shell to coordinate the ion selectively on the basis of its size and charge. To discover how the K+ channel solves this fundamental aspect of ion conduction, we solved the structure of the KcsA K+ channel in complex with a monoclonal Fab antibody fragment at 2.0 A resolution. Here we show how the K+ channel displaces water molecules around an ion at its extracellular entryway, and how it holds a K+ ion in a square antiprism of water molecules in a cavity near its intracellular entryway. Carbonyl oxygen atoms within the selectivity filter form a very similar square antiprism around each K+ binding site, as if to mimic the waters of hydration. The selectivity filter changes its ion coordination structure in low K+ solutions. This structural change is crucial to the operation of the selectivity filter in the cellular context, where the K+ ion concentration near the selectivity filter varies in response to channel gating.
2909547	A 2.0-A structure of the blue copper protein (cupredoxin) from Alcaligenes faecalis S-6.	The structure of a blue copper protein, cupredoxin, from the potent denitrifying bacterium Alcaligenes faecalis S-6, has been determined and refined against 2 A x-ray diffraction data. The agreement between observed and calculated structure factors is 0.159, and estimated errors in coordinates are 0.09-0.15 A. The protein folds in a beta sandwich similar to plastocyanin and azurin and includes features such as a "kink" and a "tyrosine loop" which have been noted previously for these proteins as well as immunoglobulins. The copper is bound by four ligands, in a distorted tetrahedral arrangement, with Cu-S gamma = 2.07 A (Cys-78), Cu-N delta 1 = 2.10 and 2.21 for His-40 and His-81, and Cu-S delta = 2.69 A (Met-86). Two of the ligands are further oriented by hydrogen bonds either to other side chains (Asn-9 to His-40), backbone atoms (NH...S) or a water molecule (to His-40). The methionine ligand has no extra constraints. The C-terminal loop containing three of the ligands is hydrogen-bonded to the strand containing His-40 by hydrogen bonds between the conserved residues Thr-79 and Asn-41. The pronounced dichroism of the crystal is a result of the orientation of the normal to the C beta-S gamma-Cu plane parallel to the crystallographic 6-fold axis.
12079386	The structure of an allosamidin complex with the Coccidioides immitis chitinase defines a role for a second acid residue in substrate-assisted mechanism.	Allosamidin is a known inhibitor of class 18 chitinases. We show that allosamidin is a competitive inhibitor of the fungal chitinase CiX1 from Coccidioides immitis, with a K(i) of 60 nM. We report the X-ray structure of the complex and show that upon inhibitor binding the side-chain of Asp169 rotates to form an ion pair with the oxazolinium cation. The mechanism of action is thought to involve protonation of the leaving group by Glu171 and substrate assistance by the sugar acetamido moiety to form an oxazoline-like intermediate. We converted both amino acid residues to the corresponding amide and found that each mutation effectively abolishes enzyme activity. X-ray structures show the mutant enzymes retain the basic wild-type structure and that the loss of mutant activity is due to their altered chemical properties. The high affinity of allosamidin, and its similarity to the putative reaction intermediate, suggests it is a transition state analog. This helps validate our contention that the role of Asp169 is to electrostatically stabilize the reaction transition state.
12927546	Three dimensional structures of S189D chymotrypsin and D189S trypsin mutants: the effect of polarity at site 189 on a protease-specific stabilization of the substrate-binding site.	The crystal structure of S189D rat chymotrypsin have been determined (resolution 2.55A) and compared, together with D189S rat trypsin to wild-type structures to examine why these single mutations resulted in poorly active, non-specific enzymes instead of converting the specificities of trypsin and chymotrypsin into each other. Both mutants have stable structure but suffer from a surprisingly large number of serious deformations. These are restricted to the activation domain, mainly to the substrate-binding region and are larger in S189D chymotrypsin. A wild-type substrate-binding mode in the mutants is disfavored by substantial displacements of the Cys191-Cys220 disulfide and loop segments 185-195 (loop C2/D2) and 217-224 (loop E2/F2) at the specificity site. As a consequence, the substrate-binding clefts become wider and more solvent-accessible in the middle third and occluded in the lower third. Interestingly, while the Ser189 residue in D189S trypsin adopts a chymotrypsin-like conformation, the Asp189 residue in S189D chymotrypsin is turned out toward the solvent. The rearrangements in D189S trypsin are at the same sites where trypsin and trypsinogen differ and, in S189D chymotrypsin, the oxyanion hole as well as the salt-bridge between Asp194 and the N-terminal of Ile16 are missing as in chymotrypsinogen. Despite these similarities, the mutants do not have zymogen conformation. The Ser189Asp and Asp189Ser substitutions are structurally so disruptive probably because the stabilization of such a different specificity site polarities as those after the removal or introduction of a charged residue are beyond the capability of the wild-type conformation of the substrate-binding region.
15828847	Potent and selective Aurora inhibitors identified by the expansion of a novel scaffold for protein kinase inhibition.	Potent and selective Aurora kinase inhibitors were identified from the combinatorial expansion of the 1,4,5,6-tetrahydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrazole bi-cycle, a novel and versatile scaffold designed to target the ATP pocket of protein kinases. The most potent compound reported in this study had an IC(50) of 0.027 microM in the enzymatic assay for Aur-A inhibition and IC(50)s between 0.05 microM and 0.5 microM for the inhibition of proliferation of different tumor cell lines.
14978308	Lead optimization of antifungal peptides with 3D NMR structures analysis.	Antimicrobial peptides are key components of the innate immune response in most multicellular organisms. These molecules are considered as one of the most innovative class of anti-infective agents that have been discovered over the last two decades, and therefore, as a source of inspiration for novel drug design. Insect cystine-rich antimicrobial peptides with the CS alpha beta scaffold (an alpha-helix linked to a beta-sheet by two disulfide bridges) represent particularly attractive templates for the development of systemic agents owing to their remarkable resistance to protease degradation. We have selected heliomicin, a broad spectrum antifungal CS alpha beta peptide from Lepidoptera as the starting point of a lead optimization program based on phylogenic exploration and fine tuned mutagenesis. We report here the characterization, biological activity, and 3D structure of heliomicin improved analogs, namely the peptides ARD1, ETD-135, and ETD-151. The ARD1 peptide was initially purified from the immune hemolymph of the caterpillars of Archeoprepona demophoon. Although it differs from heliomicin by only two residues, it was found to be more active against the human pathogens Aspergillus fumigatus and Candida albicans. The peptides ETD-135 and ETD-151 were engineered by site-directed mutagenesis of ARD1 in either cationic or hydrophobic regions. ETD-135 and ETD-151 demonstrated an improved antifungal activity over the native peptides, heliomicin and ARD1. A comparative analysis of the 3D structure of the four molecules highlighted the direct impact of the modification of the amphipathic properties on the molecule potency. In addition, it allowed to characterize an optimal organization of cationic and hydrophobic regions to achieve best antifungal activity.
8634289	Cooperative interactions of RNA and thiostrepton antibiotic with two domains of ribosomal protein L11.	Ribosomal protein L11 interacts with a 58-nucleotide domain of large subunit ribosomal RNA; both the protein and its RNA target have been highly conserved. The antibiotic thiostrepton recognizes the same RNA domain, and binds to the ribosome cooperatively with L11. Experiments presented here show that RNA recognition and thiostrepton cooperativity can be attributed to C- and N-terminal domains of L11, respectively. Under trypsin digestion conditions that degrade Bacillus stearothermophilus L11 to small fragments, the target RNA protects the C-terminal 77 residues from digestion, and thiostrepton and RNA in combination protect the entire protein. A 76-residue C-terminal fragment of L11 was overexpressed and shown to fold into a stable structure binding ribosomal RNA with essentially the same properties as full-length L11. An L11.thiostrepton.RNA complex was 100-200-fold more stable than expected on the basis of L11-RNA and thiostrepton-RNA binding affinities; similar measurements with the C-terminal fragment detected no cooperativity with thiostrepton. L11 function is thus more complex than simple interaction with ribosomal RNA; we suggest that thiostrepton mimics some ribosomal component or factor that normally interacts with the L11 N-terminal domain.
16131751	Structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of nitrite reductase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.3 at high pH: changes in the interactions of the type 2 copper.	Nitrite reductase is an enzyme operating in the denitrification pathway which catalyses the conversion of nitrite (NO2(-)) to gaseous nitric oxide (NO). Here, crystal structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of the copper-containing nitrite reductase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.3 are presented at 1.74 and 1.85 A resolution, respectively. Whereas the structure of the enzyme is very similar to those of other copper-containing nitrite reductases, folding as a trimer and containing two copper sites per monomer, the structures reported here enable conformational differences between the oxidized and reduced forms of the enzyme to be identified. In the type 1 copper site, a rotational perturbation of the side chain of the copper ligand Met182 occurs upon reduction. At the type 2 copper site, a dual conformation of the catalytic residue His287 is observed in the oxidized structure but is lacking in the reduced structure, such that the interactions of the oxidized type 2 copper ion can be regarded as adopting octahedral geometry. These findings shed light on the structural mechanism of the reduction of a copper-bound nitrite to nitric oxide and water.
2001356	High-resolution three-dimensional structure of reduced recombinant human thioredoxin in solution.	The solution structure of recombinant human thioredoxin (105 residues) has been determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy combined with hybrid distance geometry-dynamical simulated annealing calculations. Approximate interproton distance restraints were derived from nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) measurements. In addition, a large number of stereospecific assignments for beta-methylene protons and torsion angle restraints for phi, psi, and chi 1 were obtained by using a conformational grid search on the basis of the intraresidue and sequential NOE data in conjunction with 3JHN alpha and 3J alpha beta coupling constants. The structure calculations were based on 1983 approximate interproton distance restraints, 52 hydrogen-bonding restraints for 26 hydrogen bonds, and 98 phi, 71 psi, and 72 chi 1 torsion angle restraints. The 33 final simulated annealing structures obtained had an average atomic rms distribution of the individual structures about the mean coordinate positions of 0.40 +/- 0.06 A for the backbone atoms and 0.78 +/- 0.05 A for all atoms. The solution structure of human thioredoxin consists of a five-stranded beta-sheet surrounded by four alpha-helices, with an active site protrusion containing the two redox-active cysteines. The overall structure is similar to the crystal and NMR structures of oxidized [Katti, S. K., LeMaster, D. M., & Eklund, H. (1990) J. Mol. Biol. 212, 167-184] and reduced [Dyson, J. H., Gippert, G. P., Case, D. A., Holmgren, A., & Wright, P. (1990) Biochemistry 29, 4129-4136] Escherichia coli thioredoxin, respectively, despite the moderate 25% amino acid sequence homology. Several differences, however, can be noted. The human alpha 1 helix is a full turn longer than the corresponding helix in E. coli thioredoxin and is characterized by a more regular helical geometry. The helix labeled alpha 3 in human thioredoxin has its counterpart in the 3(10) helix of the E. coli protein and is also longer in the human protein. In contrast to these structural differences, the conformation of the active site loop in both proteins is very similar, reflecting the perfect sequence identity for a stretch of eight amino acid residues around the redox-active cysteines.
9695945	Prolyl oligopeptidase: an unusual beta-propeller domain regulates proteolysis.	Prolyl oligopeptidase is a large cytosolic enzyme that belongs to a new class of serine peptidases. The enzyme is involved in the maturation and degradation of peptide hormones and neuropeptides, which relate to the induction of amnesia. The 1.4 A resolution crystal structure is presented here. The enzyme contains a peptidase domain with an alpha/beta hydrolase fold, and its catalytic triad (Ser554, His680, Asp641) is covered by the central tunnel of an unusual beta propeller. This domain makes prolyl oligopeptidase an oligopeptidase by excluding large structured peptides from the active site. In this way, the propeller protects larger peptides and proteins from proteolysis in the cytosol. The structure is also obtained with a transition state inhibitor, which may facilitate drug design to treat memory disorders.
1304894	Functional mapping of the surface of Escherichia coli ribose-binding protein: mutations that affect chemotaxis and transport.	Ribose-binding protein is a bifunctional soluble receptor found in the periplasm of Escherichia coli. Interaction of liganded binding protein with the ribose high affinity transport complex results in the transfer of ribose across the cytoplasmic membrane. Alternatively, interaction of liganded binding protein with a chemotactic signal transducer, Trg, initiates taxis toward ribose. We have generated a functional map of the surface of ribose-binding protein by creating and analyzing directed mutations of exposed residues. Residues in an area on the cleft side of the molecule including both domains have effects on transport. A portion of the area involved in transport is also essential to chemotactic function. On the opposite face of the protein, mutations in residues near the hinge are shown to affect chemotaxis specifically.
15628861	zFP538, a yellow-fluorescent protein from Zoanthus, contains a novel three-ring chromophore.	Crystal structures of the tetrameric yellow-fluorescent protein zFP538 from the button polyp Zoanthus sp. and a green-emitting mutant (K66M) are presented. The atomic models have been refined at 2.7 and 2.5 A resolution, with final crystallographic R factors of 0.206 (R(free) = 0.255) and 0.190 (R(free) = 0.295), respectively, and have excellent stereochemistry. The fold of the protomer is very similar to that of green (GFP) and red (DsRed) fluorescent proteins; however, evidence from crystallography and mass spectrometry suggests that zFP538 contains a three-ring chromophore derived from that of GFP. The yellow-emitting species (lambda(em)(max) = 538 nm) is proposed to result from a transimination reaction in which a transiently appearing DsRed-like acylimine is attacked by the terminal amino group of lysine 66 to form a new six-membered ring, cleaving the polypeptide backbone at the 65-66 position. This extends the chromophore conjugation by an additional double bond compared to GFP, lowering the absorption and emission frequencies. Substitution of lysine 66 with aspartate or glutamate partially converts zFP538 into a red-fluorescent protein, providing additional support for an acylimine intermediate. The diverse and unexpected roles of the side chain at position 66 give new insight into the chemistry of chromophore maturation in the extended family of GFP-like proteins.
16004871	Structural basis and kinetics of DsbD-dependent cytochrome c maturation.	DsbD from Escherichia coli transports two electrons from cytoplasmic thioredoxin to the periplasmic substrate proteins DsbC, DsbG and CcmG. DsbD consists of an N-terminal periplasmic domain (nDsbD), a C-terminal periplasmic domain, and a central transmembrane domain. Each domain possesses two cysteines required for electron transport. Herein, we demonstrate fast (3.9 x 10(5) M(-1)s(-1)) and direct disulfide exchange between nDsbD and CcmG, a highly specific disulfide reductase essential for cytochrome c maturation. We determined the crystal structure of the disulfide-linked complex between nDsbD and the soluble part of CcmG at 1.94 A resolution. In contrast to the other two known complexes of nDsbD with target proteins, the N-terminal segment of nDsbD contributes to specific recognition of CcmG. This and other features, like the possibility of using an additional interaction surface, constitute the structural basis for the adaptability of nDsbD to different protein substrates.
8987974	X-ray crystallographic studies of alanine-65 variants of carbonic anhydrase II reveal the structural basis of compromised proton transfer in catalysis.	The three-dimensional structures of A65F, A65L, A65H, A65T, A65S, and A65G human carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) variants have been solved by X-ray crystallographic methods to probe the importance of residue 65 and the structural implications of its evolutionary drift in the greater family of carbonic anhydrase isozymes. Structure-activity relationships in this series of CAII variants are correlated with those established for other carbonic anhydrase isozymes. We conclude that a bulky side chain at position 65 hinders the formation of an effective solvent bridge between zinc-bound water and H64 and thereby hinders solvent-mediated proton transfer between these two groups [Jackman, J. E., Merz, K. M., Jr., & Fierke, C. A. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 16421-16428]. Despite the introduction of a polar hydroxyl group at this position, smaller side chains such as serine or threonine substituted for A65 do not perturb the formation of a solvent bridge between H64 and zinc-bound solvent. Thus, the evolution of residue 65 size is one factor affecting the trajectory of catalytic proton transfer.
12033935	Tryptophan 80 and leucine 143 are critical for the hydride transfer step of thymidylate synthase by controlling active site access.	Mutant forms of thymidylate synthase (TS) with substitutions at the conserved active site residue, Trp 80, are deficient in the hydride transfer step of the TS reaction. These mutants produce a beta-mercaptoethanol (beta-ME) adduct of the 2'-deoxyuridine-5'-monophosphate (dUMP) exocyclic methylene intermediate. Trp 80 has been proposed to assist hydride transfer by stabilizing a 5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate (THF) radical cation intermediate [Barrett, J. E., Lucero, C. M., and Schultz, P. G. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 7965-7966.] formed after THF changes its binding from the cofactor pocket to a putative alternate site. To understand the molecular basis of hydride transfer deficiency in a mutant in which Trp 80 was changed to Gly, we determined the X-ray structures of this mutant Escherichia coli TS complexed with dUMP and the folate analogue 10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate (CB3717) and of the wild-type enzyme complexed with dUMP and THF. The mutant enzyme has a cavity in the active site continuous with bulk solvent. This cavity, sealed from bulk solvent in wild-type TS by Leu 143, would allow nucleophilic attack of beta-ME on the dUMP C5 exocyclic methylene. The structure of the wild-type enzyme/dUMP/THF complex shows that THF is bound in the cofactor binding pocket and is well positioned to transfer hydride to the dUMP exocyclic methylene. Together, these results suggest that THF does not reorient during hydride transfer and indicate that the role of Trp 80 may be to orient Leu 143 to shield the active site from bulk solvent and to optimally position the cofactor for hydride transfer.
15930632	Different crystal packing in Fab-protein L semi-disordered peptide complex.	Proteins and peptides with variable degrees of disorder are a challenge for protein crystallization. These may be completely disordered or just contain regions with a high degree of mobility that may be represented by a multitude of discretely defined conformations. These difficulties are not insurmountable, but it may be unreasonable to expect a clean result from a structural point of view. The complex between a murine monoclonal antibody (19D9D6) and a synthetic peptide that encompasses the first 45 residues of the core protein of Hepatitis C virus that is poorly structured in solution has been crystallized. In order to make the crystallization possible, use was made of a single immunoglobulin-binding domain of protein L from Peptostreptococcus magnus (PpL), a bacterial protein that can bind the variable region (Fv) of a large population of antibodies through its light chain with no interference with antibody-antigen recognition. Crystals were obtained in different space groups where the size of the cavity that accommodates the peptide is different, although many of the crystal contacts and the overall lattice are preserved. The peptide can be considered to be semi-disordered and the larger cavity accommodates a better ordered peptide than the smaller one. The lattice is of interest for the design of a scaffold system for the crystallization of peptide-tagged proteins since a cavity that accommodates a disordered entity might be able to host ordered proteins of the same size and shape as the cavity. Here, the differences between the lattices formed by this trimolecular complex are described and it is discussed how such a system may be adapted to the crystallization of peptide-tagged proteins.
8384877	The Asp-His-Fe triad of cytochrome c peroxidase controls the reduction potential, electronic structure, and coupling of the tryptophan free radical to the heme.	The buried charge of Asp-235 in cytochrome c peroxidase (CCP) forms an important hydrogen bond to the histidine ligand of the heme iron. The Asp-His-metal interaction, which is similar to the catalytic triad of serine proteases, is found at the active site of many metalloenzymes and is believed to modulate the character of histidine as a metal ligand. We have examined the influence of this interaction in CCP on the function, redox properties, and iron zero-field splitting in the native ferric state and its effect on the Trp-191 free radical site in the oxidized ES complex. Unlike D235A and D235N, the mutation D235E introduces very little perturbation in the X-ray crystal structure of the enzyme active site, with only minor changes in the geometry of the carboxylate-histidine interaction and no observable change at the Trp-191 free radical site. More significant effects are observed in the position of the helix containing residue Glu-235. However, the small change in hydrogen bond geometry is all that is necessary to (1) increase the reduction potential by 70 mV, (2) alter the anisotropy of the Trp-191 free radical EPR, (3) affect the activity and spin-state equilibrium, and (4) reduce the strength of the iron ligand field as measured by the zero-field splitting. The changes in the redox potential with substitution are correlated with the observed zero-field splitting, suggesting that redox control is exerted through the heme ligand by a combination of electrostatic and ligand field effects. The replacement of Asp-235 with Glu appears to result in a significantly weaker hydrogen bond in which the proton resides essentially with His-175. This hydrogen bond is nevertheless strong enough to prevent the reorientation of Trp-191 and the conversion to one of two low-spin states observed for D235A and D235N. The Asp-His-Fe interaction is therefore as important in defining the redox properties and imidazolate character of His-175 as has been proposed, yet its most important role in peroxidase function may be to correctly orient Trp-191 for efficient coupling of the free radical to the heme and to maintain a high-spin 5-coordinate heme center.
10535917	A structural view of evolutionary divergence.	Two directed evolution experiments on p-nitrobenzyl esterase yielded one enzyme with a 100-fold increased activity in aqueous-organic solvents and another with a 17 degrees C increase in thermostability. Structures of the wild type and its organophilic and thermophilic counterparts are presented at resolutions of 1.5 A, 1.6 A, and 2.0 A, respectively. These structures identify groups of interacting mutations and demonstrate how directed evolution can traverse complex fitness landscapes. Early-generation mutations stabilize flexible loops not visible in the wild-type structure and set the stage for further beneficial mutations in later generations. The mutations exert their influence on the esterase structure over large distances, in a manner that would be difficult to predict. The loops with the largest structural changes generally are not the sites of mutations. Similarly, none of the seven amino acid substitutions in the organophile are in the active site, even though the enzyme experiences significant changes in the organization of this site. In addition to reduction of surface loop flexibility, thermostability in the evolved esterase results from altered core packing, helix stabilization, and the acquisition of surface salt bridges, in agreement with other comparative studies of mesophilic and thermophilic enzymes. Crystallographic analysis of the wild type and its evolved counterparts reveals networks of mutations that collectively reorganize the active site. Interestingly, the changes that led to diversity within the alpha/beta hydrolase enzyme family and the reorganization seen in this study result from main-chain movements.
15932939	Structural basis of the Sir1-origin recognition complex interaction in transcriptional silencing.	The Sir1 protein plays a key role in establishing a silent chromatin structure at the cryptic mating-type loci HMR and HML in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by interacting with the bromo-adjacent homology (BAH) domain of the Orc1p subunit of the origin recognition complex (ORC). Here, we present the high-resolution crystal structures of the ORC interaction region (OIR) of Sir1p and that of the complex formed between the OIR and BAH domains. Amino acids within the OIR previously shown to be required for a Sir1p/ORC interaction are presented on a conserved, convex surface that forms a complementary interface with a concave region of the Orc1 BAH domain that is critical for transcriptional silencing. The OIR/BAH interaction surface comprises a network of hydrophobic and polar/ionic interactions between discrete structural modules in each protein and involves several residues that were not implicated in previous studies. These data provide important structural insights into a protein-protein interaction critical for the formation of a specialized chromatin domain within eukaryotic chromosomes.
8331655	Structure and function of the Escherichia coli ribonucleotide reductase protein R2.	The crystal structure of the ribonucleotide reductase free radical protein R2 from Escherichia coli has been determined by multiple isomorphous replacement and twofold molecular averaging. The structure has been refined at 2.2 A resolution to R = 0.175. The subunit structure of the R2 protein has a novel fold where the basic motif is a bundle of eight long helices. The R2 dimer has two equivalent dinuclear iron centers. Each iron center is well buried in the subunit. The iron atoms have both histidine and carboxyl acid ligands and are bridged by an oxide ion and the carboxylate group of Glu115. One iron atom is octahedrally coordinated with small deviations from ideal values, while the coordination of the other iron ion is more distorted, mainly due to the fact that Asp84 is a bidental ligand to this iron atom. The oxidation of the enzymatically essential tyrosine residue (Tyr122) and the dinuclear iron center by molecular oxygen is suggested to take part in a suitable conserved oxygen-binding pocket between the iron center and the tyrosine zeta-oxygen 5.3 A away from the closest iron ion. The tyrosine proton can be abstracted by the dioxygen and the deprotonated tyrosine residue is then more easily oxidized to a radical species. Tyr122 is buried inside the protein about 10 A from the surface. This has the consequence that the tyrosyl radical cannot participate directly in hydrogen abstraction from the substrate ribose at the active site of the holoenzyme located on the R1 subunit. The radical must then be indirectly involved in the mechanism of the enzyme and an electron transfer reaction between the active site and the tyrosine must take place. Based on the analysis of the available ribonucleotide reductase sequences, the binding surface for the large ribonucleotide reductase protein R1, and a possible route for an electron transport between the buried radical and this surface is described.
11447291	A mutant cholera toxin B subunit that binds GM1- ganglioside but lacks immunomodulatory or toxic activity.	GM1-ganglioside receptor binding by the B subunit of cholera toxin (CtxB) is widely accepted to initiate toxin action by triggering uptake and delivery of the toxin A subunit into cells. More recently, GM1 binding by isolated CtxB, or the related B subunit of Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin (EtxB), has been found to modulate leukocyte function, resulting in the down-regulation of proinflammatory immune responses that cause autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes. Here, we demonstrate that GM1 binding, contrary to expectation, is not sufficient to initiate toxin action. We report the engineering and crystallographic structure of a mutant cholera toxin, with a His to Ala substitution in the B subunit at position 57. Whereas the mutant retained pentameric stability and high affinity binding to GM1-ganglioside, it had lost its immunomodulatory activity and, when part of the holotoxin complex, exhibited ablated toxicity. The implications of these findings on the mode of action of cholera toxin are discussed.
15252033	The anticoagulant thrombin mutant W215A/E217A has a collapsed primary specificity pocket.	The thrombin mutant W215A/E217A features a drastically impaired catalytic activity toward chromogenic and natural substrates but efficiently activates the anticoagulant protein C in the presence of thrombomodulin. As the remarkable anticoagulant properties of this mutant continue to be unraveled in preclinical studies, we solved the x-ray crystal structures of its free form and its complex with the active site inhibitor H-d-Phe-Pro-Arg-CH(2)Cl (PPACK). The PPACK-bound structure of W215A/E217A is identical to the structure of the PPACK-bound slow form of thrombin. On the other hand, the structure of the free form reveals a collapse of the 215-217 strand that crushes the primary specificity pocket. The collapse results from abrogation of the stacking interaction between Phe-227 and Trp-215 and the polar interactions of Glu-217 with Thr-172 and Lys-224. Other notable changes are a rotation of the carboxylate group of Asp-189, breakage of the H-bond between the catalytic residues Ser-195 and His-57, breakage of the ion pair between Asp-222 and Arg-187, and significant disorder in the 186- and 220-loops that define the Na(+) site. These findings explain the impaired catalytic activity of W215A/E217A and demonstrate that the analysis of the molecular basis of substrate recognition by thrombin and other proteases requires crystallization of both the free and bound forms of the enzyme.
15795221	The molecular architecture of galactose mutarotase/UDP-galactose 4-epimerase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.	The metabolic pathway by which beta-D-galactose is converted to glucose 1-phosphate is known as the Leloir pathway and consists of four enzymes. In most organisms, these enzymes appear to exist as soluble entities in the cytoplasm. In yeast such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, however, the first and last enzymes of the pathway, galactose mutarotase and UDP-galactose 4-epimerase, are contained within a single polypeptide chain referred to as Gal10p. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of Gal10p in complex with NAD(+), UDP-glucose, and beta-D-galactose determined to 1.85-A resolution. The enzyme is dimeric with dimensions of approximately 91 A x 135 A x 108 A and assumes an almost V-shaped appearance. The overall architecture of the individual subunits can be described in terms of two separate N- and C-terminal domains connected by a Type II turn formed by Leu-357 to Val-360. The first 356 residues of Gal10p fold into the classical bilobal topology observed for all other UDP-galactose 4-epimerases studied thus far. This N-terminal domain contains the binding sites for NAD(+) and UDP-glucose. The polypeptide chain extending from Glu-361 to Ser-699 adopts a beta-sandwich motif and harbors the binding site for beta-D-galactose. The two active sites of Gal10p are separated by over 50 A. This investigation represents the first structural analysis of a dual function enzyme in the Leloir pathway.
12479822	A structural basis for LCMV immune evasion: subversion of H-2D(b) and H-2K(b) presentation of gp33 revealed by comparative crystal structure.Analyses.	LCMV infection of H-2(b) mice generates a CD8(+) CTL response mainly directed toward three immunodominant epitopes. One of these, gp33, is presented by both H-2D(b) and H-2K(b) MHC class I molecules. The virus can escape immune recognition in the context of both these MHC class I molecules through single mutations of the peptide. In order to understand the underlying structural mechanism, we determined the crystal structures of both complexes. The structures reveal that the peptide is presented in two diametrically opposed manners by H-2D(b) and H-2K(b), with residues used as anchor positions in one MHC class I molecule interacting with the TCR in the other. Importantly, the peptide's N-terminal residue p1K protrudes from the binding cleft in H-2K(b). We present structural evidence that explains the functional consequences of single mutations found in escape variants.
12414796	Contribution of glycine 146 to a conserved folding module affecting stability and refolding of human glutathione transferase p1-1.	In human glutathione transferase P1-1 (hGSTP1-1) position 146 is occupied by a glycine residue, which is located in a bend of a long loop that together with the alpha6-helix forms a substructure (GST motif II) maintained in all soluble GSTs. In the present study G146A and G146V mutants were generated by site-directed mutagenesis in order to investigate the function played by this conserved residue in folding and stability of hGSTP1-1. Crystallographic analysis of the G146V variant, expressed at the permissive temperature of 25 degrees C, indicates that the mutation causes a substantial change of the backbone conformation because of steric hindrance. Stability measurements indicate that this mutant is inactivated at a temperature as low as 32 degrees C. The structure of the G146A mutant is identical to that of the wild type with the mutated residue having main-chain bond angles in a high energy region of the Ramachandran plot. However even this Gly --> Ala substitution inactivates the enzyme at 37 degrees C. Thermodynamic analysis of all variants confirms, together with previous findings, the critical role played by GST motif II for overall protein stability. Analysis of reactivation in vitro indicates that any mutation of Gly-146 alters the folding pathway by favoring aggregation at 37 degrees C. It is hypothesized that the GST motif II is involved in the nucleation mechanism of the protein and that the substitution of Gly-146 alters this transient substructure. Gly-146 is part of the buried local sequence GXXh(T/S)XXDh (X is any residue and h is a hydrophobic residue), conserved in all GSTs and related proteins that seems to behave as a characteristic structural module important for protein folding and stability.
14699104	The structural GDP/GTP cycle of Rab11 reveals a novel interface involved in the dynamics of recycling endosomes.	The small GTP-binding protein Rab11 is an essential regulator of the dynamics of recycling endosomes. Here we report the crystallographic analysis of the GDP/GTP cycle of human Rab11a, and a structure-based mutagenesis study that identifies a novel mutant phenotype. The crystal structures show that the nucleotide-sensitive switch 1 and 2 regions differ from those of other Rab proteins. In Rab11-GDP, they contribute to a close packed symmetrical dimer, which may associate to membranes in the cell and allow Rab11 to undergo GDP/GTP cycles without recycling to the cytosol. The structure of active Rab11 delineates a three-dimensional site that includes switch 1 and is separate from the site defined by the Rab3/Rabphilin interface. It is proposed to form a novel interface for a Rab11 partner compatible with the simultaneous binding of another partner at the Rabphilin interface. Mutation of Ser(29) to Phe in this epitope resulted in morphological modifications of the recycling compartment that are distinct from those induced by the classical dominant-negative and constitutively active Rab11 mutants. Recycling endosomes condensed in the perinuclear region where they retained recycling transferrin, and they clustered Rab11- and EEA1-positive membranes. Altogether, our study suggests that this mutation impairs a specific subset of Rab11 interactions, possibly those involved in cytoskeleton-based movements driving the slow recycling pathway.
15880695	Metal ions as cofactors for the binding of inhibitors to methionine aminopeptidase: a critical view of the relevance of in vitro metalloenzyme assays.	
8316857	Three-dimensional structure of myosin subfragment-1: a molecular motor.	Directed movement is a characteristic of many living organisms and occurs as a result of the transformation of chemical energy into mechanical energy. Myosin is one of three families of molecular motors that are responsible for cellular motility. The three-dimensional structure of the head portion of myosin, or subfragment-1, which contains both the actin and nucleotide binding sites, is described. This structure of a molecular motor was determined by single crystal x-ray diffraction. The data provide a structural framework for understanding the molecular basis of motility.
15280952	Nucleophilic and general acid catalysis at physiological pH by a designed miniature esterase.	A 31-residue peptide (Art-Est) was designed to catalyse the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl esters through histidine catalysis on the solvent exposed face of the alpha-helix of bovine pancreatic polypeptide. NMR spectroscopy indicated that Art-Est adopted a stable 3-dimensional structure in solution. Art-Est was an efficient catalyst with second order rate constants of up to 0.050 M(-1) s(-1). The activity of Art-Est was a consequence of the increased nucleophilicity of His-22, which had a reduced pK(a) value of 5.5 as a consequence of its interaction with His-18 and the positively charged Arg-25 and Arg-26. Mass spectrometry and NMR spectroscopy confirmed that the Art-Est catalysed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl esters proceeded through an acyl-enzyme intermediate. A solvent kinetic isotope effect of 1.8 indicated that the transition state preceding the acyl intermediate was stabilised through interaction with the protonated side-chain of His-18 and indicated a reaction mechanism similar to that generally observed for natural esterases. The involvement in the reaction of two histidine residues with different pK(a) values led to a bell-shaped dependence of the reaction rate on the pH of the solution. The catalytic behaviour of Art-Est indicated that designed miniature enzymes can act in a transparent mechanism based fashion with enzyme-like behaviour through the interplay of several amino acid residues.
12374866	Expanding pyrimidine diphosphosugar libraries via structure-based nucleotidylyltransferase engineering.	In vitro "glycorandomization" is a chemoenzymatic approach for generating diverse libraries of glycosylated biomolecules based on natural product scaffolds. This technology makes use of engineered variants of specific enzymes affecting metabolite glycosylation, particularly nucleotidylyltransferases and glycosyltransferases. To expand the repertoire of UDP/dTDP sugars readily available for glycorandomization, we now report a structure-based engineering approach to increase the diversity of alpha-d-hexopyranosyl phosphates accepted by Salmonella enterica LT2 alpha-d-glucopyranosyl phosphate thymidylyltransferase (E(p)). This article highlights the design rationale, determined substrate specificity, and structural elucidation of three "designed" mutations, illustrating both the success and unexpected outcomes from this type of approach. In addition, a single amino acid substitution in the substrate-binding pocket (L89T) was found to significantly increase the set of alpha-d-hexopyranosyl phosphates accepted by E(p) to include alpha-d-allo-, alpha-d-altro-, and alpha-d-talopyranosyl phosphate. In aggregate, our results provide valuable blueprints for altering nucleotidylyltransferase specificity by design, which is the first step toward in vitro glycorandomization.
11371193	Role of charged residues at the OmpF porin channel constriction probed by mutagenesis and simulation.	The channel constriction of OmpF porin, a pore protein in the bacterial outer membrane, is highly charged due to the presence of three arginines (R42, R82, and R132) and two acidic residues (D113 and E117). The influence of these charges on ion conductance, ion selectivity, and voltage gating has been studied with mutants D113N/E117Q, R42A/R82A/R132A/D113N/E117Q, and V18K/G131K, which were designed to remove or add protein charge at the channel constriction. The crystal structures revealed no or only local changes compared to wild-type OmpF, thus allowing a comparative study. The single-channel conductance of the isosteric D113N/E117Q variant was found to be 2-fold reduced, and that of the pentuple mutant was 70% of the wild-type value, despite a considerably larger pore cross section. Ion selectivity was drastically altered by the mutations with cation/anion permeability ratios ranging from 1 to 12. Ion flow through these and eight other mutants, which have been characterized previously, was simulated by Brownian dynamics based on the detailed crystal structures. The calculated ion selectivity and relative channel conductance values agree well with the experimental data. This demonstrates that ion translocation through porin is mainly governed by pore geometry and charge, the two factors that are properly represented in the simulations.
9139923	Characterization of the Bacillus subtilis thiC operon involved in thiamine biosynthesis.	The characterization of a three-gene operon (the thiC operon) at 331 min, which is involved in thiamine biosynthesis in Bacillus subtilis, is described. The first gene in the operon is homologous to transcription activators in the lysR family. The second and third genes (thiK and thiC) have been subcloned and overexpressed in Escherichia coli. ThiK (30 kDa) catalyzes the phosphorylation of 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole. ThiC (27 kDa) catalyzes the substitution of the pyrophosphate of 2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate by 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole phosphate to yield thiamine phosphate. Transcription of the thiC operon is not regulated by thiamine or 2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine and is only slightly repressed by 4-methyl-5-(beta-hydroxyethyl)thiazole.
11124030	Crystal structure of Hsc20, a J-type Co-chaperone from Escherichia coli.	Hsc20 is a 20 kDa J-protein that regulates the ATPase activity and peptide-binding specificity of Hsc66, an hsp70-class molecular chaperone. We report herein the crystal structure of Hsc20 from Escherichia coli determined to a resolution of 1.8 A using a combination of single isomorphous replacement (SIR) and multi-wavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD). The overall structure of Hsc20 consists of two distinct domains, an N-terminal J-domain containing residues 1-75 connected by a short loop to a C-terminal domain containing residues 84-171. The structure of the J-domain, involved in interactions with Hsc66, resembles the alpha-topology of J-domain fragments of Escherichia coli DnaJ and human Hdj1 previously determined by solution NMR methods. The C-terminal domain, implicated in binding and targeting proteins to Hsc66, consists of a three-helix bundle in which two helices comprise an anti-parallel coiled-coil. The two domains make contact through an extensive hydrophobic interface ( approximately 650 A(2)) suggesting that their relative orientations are fixed. Thus, Hsc20, in addition to its role in the regulation of the ATPase activity of Hsc66, may also function as a rigid scaffold to facilitate positioning of the protein substrates targeted to Hsc66.
15510218	Crystal structure of ATF-2/c-Jun and IRF-3 bound to the interferon-beta enhancer.	Transcriptional activation of the interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene requires assembly of an enhanceosome containing the transcription factors ATF-2/c-Jun, IRF-3/IRF-7, NF-kappaB and HMGI(Y). These factors cooperatively bind a composite DNA site and activate expression of the IFN-beta gene. The 3.0 A crystal structure of the DNA-binding domains of ATF-2/c-Jun and two IRF-3 molecules in a complex with 31 base pairs (bp) of the PRDIV-PRDIII region of the IFN-beta enhancer shows that association of the four proteins with DNA creates a continuous surface for the recognition of 24 bp. The structure, together with in vitro binding studies and protein mutagenesis, shows that protein-protein interactions are not critical for cooperative binding. Instead, cooperativity arises mainly through nucleotide sequence-dependent structural changes in the DNA that allow formation of complementary DNA conformations. Because the binding sites overlap on the enhancer, the unit of recognition is the entire nucleotide sequence, not the individual subsites.
14661960	Thermodynamic cycle analysis and inhibitor design against beta-lactamase.	Beta-lactamases are the most widespread resistance mechanism to beta-lactam antibiotics, such as the penicillins and cephalosporins. Transition-state analogues that bind to the enzymes with nanomolar affinities have been introduced in an effort to reverse the resistance conferred by these enzymes. To understand the origins of this affinity, and to guide design of future inhibitors, double-mutant thermodynamic cycle experiments were undertaken. An unexpected hydrogen bond between the nonconserved Asn289 and a key inhibitor carboxylate was observed in the X-ray crystal structure of a 1 nM inhibitor (compound 1) in complex with AmpC beta-lactamase. To investigate the energy of this hydrogen bond, the mutant enzyme N289A was made, as was an analogue of 1 that lacked the carboxylate (compound 2). The differential affinity of the four different protein and analogue complexes indicates that the carboxylate-amide hydrogen bond contributes 1.7 kcal/mol to overall binding affinity. Synthesis of an analogue of 1 where the carboxylate was replaced with an aldehyde led to an inhibitor that lost all this hydrogen bond energy, consistent with the importance of the ionic nature of this hydrogen bond. To investigate the structural bases of these energies, X-ray crystal structures of N289A/1 and N289A/2 were determined to 1.49 and 1.39 A, respectively. These structures suggest that no significant rearrangement occurs in the mutant versus the wild-type complexes with both compounds. The mutant enzymes L119A and L293A were made to investigate the interaction between a phenyl ring in 1 and these residues. Whereas deletion of the phenyl itself diminishes affinity by 5-fold, the double-mutant cycles suggest that this energy does not come through interaction with the leucines, despite the close contact in the structure. The energies of these interactions provide key information for the design of improved inhibitors against beta-lactamases. The high magnitude of the ion-dipole interaction between Asn289 and the carboxylate of 1 is consistent with the idea that ionic interactions can provide significant net affinity in inhibitor complexes.
15313618	Structural evidence for direct hydride transfer from NADH to cytochrome P450nor.	Nitric oxide reductase cytochrome P450nor catalyzes an unusual reaction, direct electron transfer from NAD(P)H to bound heme. Here, we succeeded in determining the crystal structure of P450nor in a complex with an NADH analogue, nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide, which provides conclusive evidence for the mechanism of the unprecedented electron transfer. Comparison of the structure with those of dinucleotide-free forms revealed a global conformational change accompanied by intriguing local movements caused by the binding of the pyridine nucleotide. Arg64 and Arg174 fix the pyrophosphate moiety upon the dinucleotide binding. Stereo-selective hydride transfer from NADH to NO-bound heme was suggested from the structure, the nicotinic acid ring being fixed near the heme by the conserved Thr residue in the I-helix and the upward-shifted propionate side-chain of the heme. A proton channel near the NADH channel is formed upon the dinucleotide binding, which should direct continuous transfer of the hydride and proton. A salt-bridge network (Glu71-Arg64-Asp88) was shown to be crucial for a high catalytic turnover.
11258921	Large-scale domain movements and hydration structure changes in the active-site cleft of unligated glutamate dehydrogenase from Thermococcus profundus studied by cryogenic X-ray crystal structure analysis and small-angle X-ray scattering.	Here we describe the large-scale domain movements and hydration structure changes in the active-site cleft of unligated glutamate dehydrogenase. Glutamate dehydrogenase from Thermococcus profundus is composed of six identical subunits of M(r) 46K, each with two distinct domains of roughly equal size separated by a large active-site cleft. The enzyme in the unligated state was crystallized so that one hexamer occupied a crystallographic asymmetric unit, and the crystal structure of the hexamer was solved and refined at a resolution of 2.25 A with a crystallographic R-factor of 0.190. In that structure, the six subunits displayed significant conformational variations with respect to the orientations of the two domains. The variation was most likely explained as a hinge-bending motion caused by small changes in the main chain torsion angle of the residue composing a loop connecting the two domains. Small-angle X-ray scattering profiles both at 293 and 338 K suggested that the apparent molecular size of the hexamer was slightly larger in solution than in the crystalline state. These results led us to the conclusion that (i) the spontaneous domain motion was the property of the enzyme in solution, (ii) the domain motion was trapped in the crystallization process through different modes of crystal contacts, and (iii) the magnitude of the motion in solution was greater than that observed in the crystal structure. The present cryogenic diffraction experiment enabled us to identify 1931 hydration water molecules around the hexamer. The hydration structures around the subunits exhibited significant changes in accord with the degree of the domain movement. In particular, the hydration water molecules in the active-site cleft were rearranged markedly through migrations between specific hydration sites in coupling strongly with the domain movement. We discussed the cooperative dynamics between the domain motion and the hydration structure changes in the active site of the enzyme. The present study provides the first example of a visualized hydration structure varying transiently with the dynamic movements of enzymes and may form a new concept of the dynamics of multidomain enzymes in solution.
10918067	Selected mutations in a mesophilic cytochrome c confer the stability of a thermophilic counterpart.	Mesophilic cytochrome c(551) of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA c(551)) became as stable as its thermophilic counterpart, Hydrogenobacter thermophilus cytochrome c(552) (HT c(552)), through only five amino acid substitutions. The five residues, distributed in three spatially separated regions, were selected and mutated with reference to the corresponding residues in HT c(552) through careful structure comparison. Thermodynamic analysis indicated that the stability of the quintuple mutant of PA c(551) could be partly attained through an enthalpic factor. The solution structure of the mutant showed that, as in HT c(552), there were tighter side chain packings in the mutated regions. Furthermore, the mutant had an increased total accessible surface area, resulting in great negative hydration free energy. Our results provide a novel example of protein stabilization in that limited amino acid substitutions can confer the overall stability of a natural highly thermophilic protein upon a mesophilic molecule.
12842474	Multifunctional xylooligosaccharide/cephalosporin C deacetylase revealed by the hexameric structure of the Bacillus subtilis enzyme at 1.9A resolution.	Esterases and deacetylases active on carbohydrate ligands have been classified into 14 families based upon amino acid sequence similarities. Enzymes from carbohydrate esterase family seven (CE-7) are unusual in that they display activity towards both acetylated xylooligosaccharides and the antibiotic, cephalosporin C. The 1.9A structure of the multifunctional CE-7 esterase (hereinafter CAH) from Bacillus subtilis 168 reveals a classical alpha/beta hydrolase fold encased within a 32 hexamer. This is the first example of a hexameric alpha/beta hydrolase and is further evidence of the versatility of this particular fold, which is used in a wide variety of biological contexts. A narrow entrance tunnel leads to the centre of the molecule, where the six active-centre catalytic triads point towards the tunnel interior and thus are sequestered away from cytoplasmic contents. By analogy to self-compartmentalising proteases, the tunnel entrance may function to hinder access of large substrates to the poly-specific active centre. This would explain the observation that the enzyme is active on a variety of small, acetylated molecules. The structure of an active site mutant in complex with the reaction product, acetate, reveals details of the putative oxyanion binding site, and suggests that substrates bind predominantly through non-specific contacts with protein hydrophobic residues. Protein residues involved in catalysis are tethered by interactions with protein excursions from the canonical alpha/beta hydrolase fold. These excursions also mediate quaternary structure maintenance, so it would appear that catalytic competence is only achieved on protein multimerisation. We suggest that the acetyl xylan esterase (EC 3.1.1.72) and cephalosporin C deacetylase (EC 3.1.1.41) enzymes of the CE-7 family represent a single class of proteins with a multifunctional deacetylase activity against a range of small substrates.
9271499	Molecular structures of the S124A, S124T, and S124V site-directed mutants of UDP-galactose 4-epimerase from Escherichia coli.	UDP-galactose 4-epimerase plays a critical role in sugar metabolism by catalyzing the interconversion of UDP-galactose and UDP-glucose. Originally, it was assumed that the enzyme contained a "traditional" catalytic base that served to abstract a proton from the 4'-hydroxyl group of the UDP-glucose or UDP-galactose substrates during the course of the reaction. However, recent high-resolution X-ray crystallographic analyses of the protein from Escherichia coli have demonstrated the lack of an aspartate, a glutamate, or a histidine residue properly oriented within the active site cleft for serving such a functional role. Rather, the X-ray crystallographic investigation of the epimerase.NADH.UDP-glucose abortive complex from this laboratory has shown that both Ser 124 and Tyr 149 are located within hydrogen bonding distance to the 4'- and 3'-hydroxyl groups of the sugar, respectively. To test the structural role of Ser 124 in the reaction mechanism of epimerase, three site-directed mutant proteins, namely S124A, S124T, and S124V, were constructed and crystals of the S124A.NADH.UDP, S124A.NADH.UDP-glucose, S124T. NADH.UDP-glucose, and S124V.NADH.UDP-glucose complexes were grown. All of the crystals employed in this investigation belonged to the space group P3221 with the following unit cell dimensions: a = b = 83.8 A, c = 108.4 A, and one subunit per asymmetric unit. X-ray data sets were collected to at least 2.15 A resolution, and each protein model was subsequently refined to an R value of lower than 19.0% for all measured X-ray data. The investigations described here demonstrate that the decreases in enzymatic activities observed for these mutant proteins are due to the loss of a properly positioned hydroxyl group at position 124 and not to major tertiary and quaternary structural perturbations. In addition, these structures demonstrate the importance of a hydroxyl group at position 124 in stabilizing the anti conformation of the nicotinamide ring as observed in the previous structural analysis of the epimerase.NADH. UDP complex.
12065399	Crystal structure of the Lactococcus lactis formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase bound to an abasic site analogue-containing DNA.	The formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase (Fpg, MutM) is a bifunctional base excision repair enzyme (DNA glycosylase/AP lyase) that removes a wide range of oxidized purines, such as 8-oxoguanine and imidazole ring-opened purines, from oxidatively damaged DNA. The structure of a non-covalent complex between the Lactoccocus lactis Fpg and a 1,3-propanediol (Pr) abasic site analogue-containing DNA has been solved. Through an asymmetric interaction along the damaged strand and the intercalation of the triad (M75/R109/F111), Fpg pushes out the Pr site from the DNA double helix, recognizing the cytosine opposite the lesion and inducing a 60 degrees bend of the DNA. The specific recognition of this cytosine provides some structural basis for understanding the divergence between Fpg and its structural homologue endo nuclease VIII towards their substrate specificities. In addition, the modelling of the 8-oxoguanine residue allows us to define an enzyme pocket that may accommodate the extrahelical oxidized base.
10080896	Protein mimicry of DNA from crystal structures of the uracil-DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein and its complex with Escherichia coli uracil-DNA glycosylase.	Uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG), which is a critical enzyme in DNA base-excision repair that recognizes and removes uracil from DNA, is specifically and irreversably inhibited by the thermostable uracil-DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein (Ugi). A paradox for the highly specific Ugi inhibition of UDG is how Ugi can successfully mimic DNA backbone interactions for UDG without resulting in significant cross-reactivity with numerous other enzymes that possess DNA backbone binding affinity. High-resolution X-ray crystal structures of Ugi both free and in complex with wild-type and the functionally defective His187Asp mutant Escherichia coli UDGs reveal the detailed molecular basis for duplex DNA backbone mimicry by Ugi. The overall shape and charge distribution of Ugi most closely resembles a midpoint in a trajectory between B-form DNA and the kinked DNA observed in UDG:DNA product complexes. Thus, Ugi targets the mechanism of uracil flipping by UDG and appears to be a transition-state mimic for UDG-flipping of uracil nucleotides from DNA. Essentially all the exquisite shape, electrostatic and hydrophobic complementarity for the high-affinity UDG-Ugi interaction is pre-existing, except for a key flip of the Ugi Gln19 carbonyl group and Glu20 side-chain, which is triggered by the formation of the complex. Conformational changes between unbound Ugi and Ugi complexed with UDG involve the beta-zipper structural motif, which we have named for the reversible pairing observed between intramolecular beta-strands. A similar beta-zipper is observed in the conversion between the open and closed forms of UDG. The combination of extremely high levels of pre-existing structural complementarity to DNA binding features specific to UDG with key local conformational changes in Ugi resolves the UDG-Ugi paradox and suggests a potentially general structural solution to the formation of very high affinity DNA enzyme-inhibitor complexes that avoid cross- reactivity.
15897201	Structural insights into the mechanism of nuclease A, a betabeta alpha metal nuclease from Anabaena.	Nuclease A (NucA) is a nonspecific endonuclease from Anabaena sp. capable of degrading single- and double-stranded DNA and RNA in the presence of divalent metal ions. We have determined the structure of the delta(2-24),D121A mutant of NucA in the presence of Zn2+ and Mn2+ (PDB code 1ZM8). The mutations were introduced to remove the N-terminal signal peptide and to reduce the activity of the nonspecific nuclease, thereby reducing its toxicity to the Escherichia coli expression system. NucA contains a betabeta alpha metal finger motif and a hydrated Mn2+ ion at the active site. Unexpectedly, NucA was found to contain additional metal binding sites approximately 26 A apart from the catalytic metal binding site. A structural comparison between NucA and the closest analog for which structural data exist, the Serratia nuclease, indicates several interesting differences. First, NucA is a monomer rather than a dimer. Second, there is an unexpected structural homology between the N-terminal segments despite a poorly conserved sequence, which in Serratia includes a cysteine bridge thought to play a regulatory role. In addition, although a sequence alignment had suggested that NucA lacks a proposed catalytic residue corresponding to Arg57 in Serratia, the structure determined here indicates that Arg93 in NucA is positioned to fulfill this role. Based on comparison with DNA-bound nuclease structures of the betabeta alpha metal finger nuclease family and available mutational data on NucA, we propose that His124 acts as a catalytic base, and Arg93 participates in the catalysis possibly through stabilization of the transition state.
1132497	Crystals of human erythrocyte glutathione reductase.	null
11739955	Structural mechanisms of QacR induction and multidrug recognition.	The Staphylococcus aureus multidrug binding protein QacR represses transcription of the qacA multidrug transporter gene and is induced by structurally diverse cationic lipophilic drugs. Here, we report the crystal structures of six QacR-drug complexes. Compared to the DNA bound structure, drug binding elicits a coil-to-helix transition that causes induction and creates an expansive multidrug-binding pocket, containing four glutamates and multiple aromatic and polar residues. These structures indicate the presence of separate but linked drug-binding sites within a single protein. This multisite drug-binding mechanism is consonant with studies on multidrug resistance transporters.
12711609	Characterization of a novel Ser-cisSer-Lys catalytic triad in comparison with the classical Ser-His-Asp triad.	Amidase signature family enzymes, which are widespread in nature, contain a newly identified Ser-cisSer-Lys catalytic triad in which the peptide bond between Ser131 and the preceding residue Gly130 is in a cis configuration. In order to characterize the property of the novel triad, we have determined the structures of five mutant malonamidase E2 enzymes that contain a Cys-cisSer-Lys, Ser-cisAla-Lys, or Ser-cisSer-Ala triad or a substitution of Gly130 with alanine. Cysteine cannot replace the role of Ser155 due to a hyper-reactivity of the residue, which results in the modification of the cysteine to cysteinyl sulfinic acid, most likely inside the expression host cells. The lysine residue plays a structural as well as a catalytic role, since the substitution of the residue with alanine disrupts the active site structure completely. The two observations are in sharp contrast with the consequences of the corresponding substitutions in the classical Ser-His-Asp triad. Structural data on the mutant containing the Ser-cisAla-Lys triad convincingly suggest that Ser131 plays an analogous catalytic role as the histidine of the Ser-His-Asp triad. The unusual cis configuration of Ser131 appears essential for the precise contacts of this residue with the other triad residues, as indicated by the near invariance of the preceding glycine residue (Gly130), structural data on the G130A mutant, and by a modeling experiment. The data provide a deep understanding of the role of each residue of the new triad at the atomic level and demonstrate that the new triad is a catalytic device distinctively different from the classical triad or its variants.
4508314	Structure of the radical form of clostridial flavodoxin: a new molecular model.	null
9774108	Efficiency of signalling through cytokine receptors depends critically on receptor orientation.	Human erythropoietin is a haematopoietic cytokine required for the differentiation and proliferation of precursor cells into red blood cells. It activates cells by binding and orientating two cell-surface erythropoietin receptors (EPORs) which trigger an intracellular phosphorylation cascade. The half-maximal response in a cellular proliferation assay is evoked at an erythropoietin concentration of 10 pM, 10(-2) of its Kd value for erythropoietin-EPOR binding site 1 (Kd approximately equal to nM), and 10(-5) of the Kd for erythropoietin-EPOR binding site 2 (Kd approximately equal to 1 microM). Overall half-maximal binding (IC50) of cell-surface receptors is produced with approximately 0.18 nM erythropoietin, indicating that only approximately 6% of the receptors would be bound in the presence of 10 pM erythropoietin. Other effective erythropoietin-mimetic ligands that dimerize receptors can evoke the same cellular responses but much less efficiently, requiring concentrations close to their Kd values (approximately 0.1 microM). The crystal structure of erythropoietin complexed to the extracellular ligand-binding domains of the erythropoietin receptor, determined at 1.9 A from two crystal forms, shows that erythropoietin imposes a unique 120 degrees angular relationship and orientation that is responsible for optimal signalling through intracellular kinase pathways.
5160720	Atomic coordinates for subtilisin BPN' (or Novo).	null
